ACT ISCENE I. London. The palace.Enter KING HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, the EARL of WESTMORELAND, SIR WALTER BLUNT, and othersKING HENRY IVSo shaken as we are, so wan with care,Find we a time for frighted peace to pant,And breathe short-winded accents of new broilsTo be commenced in strands afar remote.No more the thirsty entrance of this soilShall daub her lips with her own children's blood;Nor more shall trenching war channel her fields,Nor bruise her flowerets with the armed hoofsOf hostile paces: those opposed eyes,Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,All of one nature, of one substance bred,Did lately meet in the intestine shockAnd furious close of civil butcheryShall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,March all one way and be no more opposedAgainst acquaintance, kindred and allies:The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,As far as to the sepulchre of Christ,Whose soldier now, under whose blessed crossWe are impressed and engaged to fight,Forthwith a power of English shall we levy;Whose arms were moulded in their mothers' wombTo chase these pagans in those holy fieldsOver whose acres walk'd those blessed feetWhich fourteen hundred years ago were nail'dFor our advantage on the bitter cross.But this our purpose now is twelve month old,And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go:Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hearOf you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland,What yesternight our council did decreeIn forwarding this dear expedience.WESTMORELANDMy liege, this haste was hot in question,And many limits of the charge set downBut yesternight: when all athwart there cameA post from Wales loaden with heavy news;Whose worst was, that the noble Mortimer,Leading the men of Herefordshire to fightAgainst the irregular and wild Glendower,Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,A thousand of his people butchered;Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,Such beastly shameless transformation,By those Welshwomen done as may not beWithout much shame retold or spoken of.KING HENRY IVIt seems then that the tidings of this broilBrake off our business for the Holy Land.WESTMORELANDThis match'd with other did, my gracious lord;For more uneven and unwelcome newsCame from the north and thus it did import:On Holy-rood day, the gallant Hotspur there,Young Harry Percy and brave Archibald,That ever-valiant and approved Scot,At Holmedon met,Where they did spend a sad and bloody hour,As by discharge of their artillery,And shape of likelihood, the news was told;For he that brought them, in the very heatAnd pride of their contention did take horse,Uncertain of the issue any way.KING HENRY IVHere is a dear, a true industrious friend,Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse.Stain'd with the variation of each soilBetwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours;And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news.The Earl of Douglas is discomfited:Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights,Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter seeOn Holmedon's plains. Of prisoners, Hotspur tookMordake the Earl of Fife, and eldest sonTo beaten Douglas; and the Earl of Athol,Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith:And is not this an honourable spoil?A gallant prize? ha, cousin, is it not?WESTMORELANDIn faith,It is a conquest for a prince to boast of.KING HENRY IVYea, there thou makest me sad and makest me sinIn envy that my Lord NorthumberlandShould be the father to so blest a son,A son who is the theme of honour's tongue;Amongst a grove, the very straightest plant;Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride:Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,See riot and dishonour stain the browOf my young Harry. O that it could be provedThat some night-tripping fairy had exchangedIn cradle-clothes our children where they lay,And call'd mine Percy, his Plantagenet!Then would I have his Harry, and he mine.But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz,Of this young Percy's pride? the prisoners,Which he in this adventure hath surprised,To his own use he keeps; and sends me word,I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.WESTMORELANDThis is his uncle's teaching; this is Worcester,Malevolent to you in all aspects;Which makes him prune himself, and bristle upThe crest of youth against your dignity.KING HENRY IVBut I have sent for him to answer this;And for this cause awhile we must neglectOur holy purpose to Jerusalem.Cousin, on Wednesday next our council weWill hold at Windsor; so inform the lords:But come yourself with speed to us again;For more is to be said and to be doneThan out of anger can be uttered.WESTMORELANDI will, my liege.ExeuntSCENE II. London. An apartment of the Prince's.Enter the PRINCE OF WALES and FALSTAFFFALSTAFFNow, Hal, what time of day is it, lad?PRINCE HENRYThou art so fat-witted, with drinking of old sackand unbuttoning thee after supper and sleeping uponbenches after noon, that thou hast forgotten todemand that truly which thou wouldst truly know.What a devil hast thou to do with the time of theday? Unless hours were cups of sack and minutescapons and clocks the tongues of bawds and dials thesigns of leaping-houses and the blessed sun himselfa fair hot wench in flame-coloured taffeta, I see noreason why thou shouldst be so superfluous to demandthe time of the day.FALSTAFFIndeed, you come near me now, Hal; for we that takepurses go by the moon and the seven stars, and notby Phoebus, he,'that wandering knight so fair.' And,I prithee, sweet wag, when thou art king, as, Godsave thy grace,--majesty I should say, for gracethou wilt have none,--PRINCE HENRYWhat, none?FALSTAFFNo, by my troth, not so much as will serve toprologue to an egg and butter.PRINCE HENRYWell, how then? come, roundly, roundly.FALSTAFFMarry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let notus that are squires of the night's body be calledthieves of the day's beauty: let us be Diana'sforesters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of themoon; and let men say we be men of good government,being governed, as the sea is, by our noble andchaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal.PRINCE HENRYThou sayest well, and it holds well too; for thefortune of us that are the moon's men doth ebb andflow like the sea, being governed, as the sea is,by the moon. As, for proof, now: a purse of goldmost resolutely snatched on Monday night and mostdissolutely spent on Tuesday morning; got withswearing 'Lay by' and spent with crying 'Bring in;'now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladderand by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the gallows.FALSTAFFBy the Lord, thou sayest true, lad. And is not myhostess of the tavern a most sweet wench?PRINCE HENRYAs the honey of Hybla, my old lad of the castle. Andis not a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of durance?FALSTAFFHow now, how now, mad wag! what, in thy quips andthy quiddities? what a plague have I to do with abuff jerkin?PRINCE HENRYWhy, what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?FALSTAFFWell, thou hast called her to a reckoning many atime and oft.PRINCE HENRYDid I ever call for thee to pay thy part?FALSTAFFNo; I'll give thee thy due, thou hast paid all there.PRINCE HENRYYea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would stretch;and where it would not, I have used my credit.FALSTAFFYea, and so used it that were it not here apparentthat thou art heir apparent--But, I prithee, sweetwag, shall there be gallows standing in England whenthou art king? and resolution thus fobbed as it iswith the rusty curb of old father antic the law? Donot thou, when thou art king, hang a thief.PRINCE HENRYNo; thou shalt.FALSTAFFShall I? O rare! By the Lord, I'll be a brave judge.PRINCE HENRYThou judgest false already: I mean, thou shalt havethe hanging of the thieves and so become a rare hangman.FALSTAFFWell, Hal, well; and in some sort it jumps with myhumour as well as waiting in the court, I can tellyou.PRINCE HENRYFor obtaining of suits?FALSTAFFYea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangmanhath no lean wardrobe. 'Sblood, I am as melancholyas a gib cat or a lugged bear.PRINCE HENRYOr an old lion, or a lover's lute.FALSTAFFYea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.PRINCE HENRYWhat sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy ofMoor-ditch?FALSTAFFThou hast the most unsavoury similes and art indeedthe most comparative, rascalliest, sweet youngprince. But, Hal, I prithee, trouble me no morewith vanity. I would to God thou and I knew where acommodity of good names were to be bought. An oldlord of the council rated me the other day in thestreet about you, sir, but I marked him not; and yethe talked very wisely, but I regarded him not; andyet he talked wisely, and in the street too.PRINCE HENRYThou didst well; for wisdom cries out in thestreets, and no man regards it.FALSTAFFO, thou hast damnable iteration and art indeed ableto corrupt a saint. Thou hast done much harm uponme, Hal; God forgive thee for it! Before I knewthee, Hal, I knew nothing; and now am I, if a manshould speak truly, little better than one of thewicked. I must give over this life, and I will giveit over: by the Lord, and I do not, I am a villain:I'll be damned for never a king's son inChristendom.PRINCE HENRYWhere shall we take a purse tomorrow, Jack?FALSTAFF'Zounds, where thou wilt, lad; I'll make one; an Ido not, call me villain and baffle me.PRINCE HENRYI see a good amendment of life in thee; from prayingto purse-taking.FALSTAFFWhy, Hal, 'tis my vocation, Hal; 'tis no sin for aman to labour in his vocation.Enter POINSPoins! Now shall we know if Gadshill have set amatch. O, if men were to be saved by merit, whathole in hell were hot enough for him? This is themost omnipotent villain that ever cried 'Stand' toa true man.PRINCE HENRYGood morrow, Ned.POINSGood morrow, sweet Hal. What says Monsieur Remorse?what says Sir John Sack and Sugar? Jack! howagrees the devil and thee about thy soul, that thousoldest him on Good-Friday last for a cup of Madeiraand a cold capon's leg?PRINCE HENRYSir John stands to his word, the devil shall havehis bargain; for he was never yet a breaker ofproverbs: he will give the devil his due.POINSThen art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.PRINCE HENRYElse he had been damned for cozening the devil.POINSBut, my lads, my lads, to-morrow morning, by fouro'clock, early at Gadshill! there are pilgrims goingto Canterbury with rich offerings, and tradersriding to London with fat purses: I have vizardsfor you all; you have horses for yourselves:Gadshill lies to-night in Rochester: I have bespokesupper to-morrow night in Eastcheap: we may do itas secure as sleep. If you will go, I will stuffyour purses full of crowns; if you will not, tarryat home and be hanged.FALSTAFFHear ye, Yedward; if I tarry at home and go not,I'll hang you for going.POINSYou will, chops?FALSTAFFHal, wilt thou make one?PRINCE HENRYWho, I rob? I a thief? not I, by my faith.FALSTAFFThere's neither honesty, manhood, nor goodfellowship in thee, nor thou camest not of the bloodroyal, if thou darest not stand for ten shillings.PRINCE HENRYWell then, once in my days I'll be a madcap.FALSTAFFWhy, that's well said.PRINCE HENRYWell, come what will, I'll tarry at home.FALSTAFFBy the Lord, I'll be a traitor then, when thou art king.PRINCE HENRYI care not.POINSSir John, I prithee, leave the prince and me alone:I will lay him down such reasons for this adventurethat he shall go.FALSTAFFWell, God give thee the spirit of persuasion and himthe ears of profiting, that what thou speakest maymove and what he hears may be believed, that thetrue prince may, for recreation sake, prove a falsethief; for the poor abuses of the time wantcountenance. Farewell: you shall find me in Eastcheap.PRINCE HENRYFarewell, thou latter spring! farewell, All-hallown summer!Exit FalstaffPOINSNow, my good sweet honey lord, ride with usto-morrow: I have a jest to execute that I cannotmanage alone. Falstaff, Bardolph, Peto and Gadshillshall rob those men that we have already waylaid:yourself and I will not be there; and when theyhave the booty, if you and I do not rob them, cutthis head off from my shoulders.PRINCE HENRYHow shall we part with them in setting forth?POINSWhy, we will set forth before or after them, andappoint them a place of meeting, wherein it is atour pleasure to fail, and then will they adventureupon the exploit themselves; which they shall haveno sooner achieved, but we'll set upon them.PRINCE HENRYYea, but 'tis like that they will know us by ourhorses, by our habits and by every otherappointment, to be ourselves.POINSTut! our horses they shall not see: I'll tie themin the wood; our vizards we will change after weleave them: and, sirrah, I have cases of buckramfor the nonce, to immask our noted outward garments.PRINCE HENRYYea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.POINSWell, for two of them, I know them to be astrue-bred cowards as ever turned back; and for thethird, if he fight longer than he sees reason, I'llforswear arms. The virtue of this jest will be, theincomprehensible lies that this same fat rogue willtell us when we meet at supper: how thirty, atleast, he fought with; what wards, what blows, whatextremities he endured; and in the reproof of thislies the jest.PRINCE HENRYWell, I'll go with thee: provide us all thingsnecessary and meet me to-morrow night in Eastcheap;there I'll sup. Farewell.POINSFarewell, my lord.Exit PoinsPRINCE HENRYI know you all, and will awhile upholdThe unyoked humour of your idleness:Yet herein will I imitate the sun,Who doth permit the base contagious cloudsTo smother up his beauty from the world,That, when he please again to be himself,Being wanted, he may be more wonder'd at,By breaking through the foul and ugly mistsOf vapours that did seem to strangle him.If all the year were playing holidays,To sport would be as tedious as to work;But when they seldom come, they wish'd for come,And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.So, when this loose behavior I throw offAnd pay the debt I never promised,By how much better than my word I am,By so much shall I falsify men's hopes;And like bright metal on a sullen ground,My reformation, glittering o'er my fault,Shall show more goodly and attract more eyesThan that which hath no foil to set it off.I'll so offend, to make offence a skill;Redeeming time when men think least I will.ExitSCENE III. London. The palace.Enter the KING, NORTHUMBERLAND, WORCESTER, HOTSPUR, SIR WALTER BLUNT, with othersKING HENRY IVMy blood hath been too cold and temperate,Unapt to stir at these indignities,And you have found me; for accordinglyYou tread upon my patience: but be sureI will from henceforth rather be myself,Mighty and to be fear'd, than my condition;Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down,And therefore lost that title of respectWhich the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.EARL OF WORCESTEROur house, my sovereign liege, little deservesThe scourge of greatness to be used on it;And that same greatness too which our own handsHave holp to make so portly.NORTHUMBERLANDMy lord.--KING HENRY IVWorcester, get thee gone; for I do seeDanger and disobedience in thine eye:O, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,And majesty might never yet endureThe moody frontier of a servant brow.You have good leave to leave us: when we needYour use and counsel, we shall send for you.Exit WorcesterYou were about to speak.To NorthNORTHUMBERLANDYea, my good lord.Those prisoners in your highness' name demanded,Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,Were, as he says, not with such strength deniedAs is deliver'd to your majesty:Either envy, therefore, or misprisonIs guilty of this fault and not my son.HOTSPURMy liege, I did deny no prisoners.But I remember, when the fight was done,When I was dry with rage and extreme toil,Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword,Came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dress'd,Fresh as a bridegroom; and his chin new reap'dShow'd like a stubble-land at harvest-home;He was perfumed like a milliner;And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he heldA pouncet-box, which ever and anonHe gave his nose and took't away again;Who therewith angry, when it next came there,Took it in snuff; and still he smiled and talk'd,And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,He call'd them untaught knaves, unmannerly,To bring a slovenly unhandsome corseBetwixt the wind and his nobility.With many holiday and lady termsHe question'd me; amongst the rest, demandedMy prisoners in your majesty's behalf.I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,To be so pester'd with a popinjay,Out of my grief and my impatience,Answer'd neglectingly I know not what,He should or he should not; for he made me madTo see him shine so brisk and smell so sweetAnd talk so like a waiting-gentlewomanOf guns and drums and wounds,--God save the mark!--And telling me the sovereign'st thing on earthWas parmaceti for an inward bruise;And that it was great pity, so it was,This villanous salt-petre should be digg'dOut of the bowels of the harmless earth,Which many a good tall fellow had destroy'dSo cowardly; and but for these vile guns,He would himself have been a soldier.This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord,I answer'd indirectly, as I said;And I beseech you, let not his reportCome current for an accusationBetwixt my love and your high majesty.SIR WALTER BLUNTThe circumstance consider'd, good my lord,Whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had saidTo such a person and in such a place,At such a time, with all the rest retold,May reasonably die and never riseTo do him wrong or any way impeachWhat then he said, so he unsay it now.KING HENRY IVWhy, yet he doth deny his prisoners,But with proviso and exception,That we at our own charge shall ransom straightHis brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer;Who, on my soul, hath wilfully betray'dThe lives of those that he did lead to fightAgainst that great magician, damn'd Glendower,Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of MarchHath lately married. Shall our coffers, then,Be emptied to redeem a traitor home?Shall we but treason? and indent with fears,When they have lost and forfeited themselves?No, on the barren mountains let him starve;For I shall never hold that man my friendWhose tongue shall ask me for one penny costTo ransom home revolted Mortimer.HOTSPURRevolted Mortimer!He never did fall off, my sovereign liege,But by the chance of war; to prove that trueNeeds no more but one tongue for all those wounds,Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he tookWhen on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank,In single opposition, hand to hand,He did confound the best part of an hourIn changing hardiment with great Glendower:Three times they breathed and three times didthey drink,Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood;Who then, affrighted with their bloody looks,Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds,And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank,Bloodstained with these valiant combatants.Never did base and rotten policyColour her working with such deadly wounds;Nor could the noble MortimerReceive so many, and all willingly:Then let not him be slander'd with revolt.KING HENRY IVThou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him;He never did encounter with Glendower:I tell thee,He durst as well have met the devil aloneAs Owen Glendower for an enemy.Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforthLet me not hear you speak of Mortimer:Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,Or you shall hear in such a kind from meAs will displease you. My Lord Northumberland,We licence your departure with your son.Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.Exeunt King Henry, Blunt, and trainHOTSPURAn if the devil come and roar for them,I will not send them: I will after straightAnd tell him so; for I will ease my heart,Albeit I make a hazard of my head.NORTHUMBERLANDWhat, drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile:Here comes your uncle.Re-enter WORCESTERHOTSPURSpeak of Mortimer!'Zounds, I will speak of him; and let my soulWant mercy, if I do not join with him:Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins,And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust,But I will lift the down-trod MortimerAs high in the air as this unthankful king,As this ingrate and canker'd Bolingbroke.NORTHUMBERLANDBrother, the king hath made your nephew mad.EARL OF WORCESTERWho struck this heat up after I was gone?HOTSPURHe will, forsooth, have all my prisoners;And when I urged the ransom once againOf my wife's brother, then his cheek look'd pale,And on my face he turn'd an eye of death,Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.EARL OF WORCESTERI cannot blame him: was not he proclaim'dBy Richard that dead is the next of blood?NORTHUMBERLANDHe was; I heard the proclamation:And then it was when the unhappy king,--Whose wrongs in us God pardon!--did set forthUpon his Irish expedition;From whence he intercepted did returnTo be deposed and shortly murdered.EARL OF WORCESTERAnd for whose death we in the world's wide mouthLive scandalized and foully spoken of.HOTSPURBut soft, I pray you; did King Richard thenProclaim my brother Edmund MortimerHeir to the crown?NORTHUMBERLANDHe did; myself did hear it.HOTSPURNay, then I cannot blame his cousin king,That wished him on the barren mountains starve.But shall it be that you, that set the crownUpon the head of this forgetful manAnd for his sake wear the detested blotOf murderous subornation, shall it be,That you a world of curses undergo,Being the agents, or base second means,The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?O, pardon me that I descend so low,To show the line and the predicamentWherein you range under this subtle king;Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,Or fill up chronicles in time to come,That men of your nobility and powerDid gage them both in an unjust behalf,As both of you--God pardon it!--have done,To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose,An plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke?And shall it in more shame be further spoken,That you are fool'd, discarded and shook offBy him for whom these shames ye underwent?No; yet time serves wherein you may redeemYour banish'd honours and restore yourselvesInto the good thoughts of the world again,Revenge the jeering and disdain'd contemptOf this proud king, who studies day and nightTo answer all the debt he owes to youEven with the bloody payment of your deaths:Therefore, I say--EARL OF WORCESTERPeace, cousin, say no more:And now I will unclasp a secret book,And to your quick-conceiving discontentsI'll read you matter deep and dangerous,As full of peril and adventurous spiritAs to o'er-walk a current roaring loudOn the unsteadfast footing of a spear.HOTSPURIf he fall in, good night! or sink or swim:Send danger from the east unto the west,So honour cross it from the north to south,And let them grapple: O, the blood more stirsTo rouse a lion than to start a hare!NORTHUMBERLANDImagination of some great exploitDrives him beyond the bounds of patience.HOTSPURBy heaven, methinks it were an easy leap,To pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon,Or dive into the bottom of the deep,Where fathom-line could never touch the ground,And pluck up drowned honour by the locks;So he that doth redeem her thence might wearWithout corrival, all her dignities:But out upon this half-faced fellowship!EARL OF WORCESTERHe apprehends a world of figures here,But not the form of what he should attend.Good cousin, give me audience for a while.HOTSPURI cry you mercy.EARL OF WORCESTERThose same noble ScotsThat are your prisoners,--HOTSPURI'll keep them all;By God, he shall not have a Scot of them;No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not:I'll keep them, by this hand.EARL OF WORCESTERYou start awayAnd lend no ear unto my purposes.Those prisoners you shall keep.HOTSPURNay, I will; that's flat:He said he would not ransom Mortimer;Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer;But I will find him when he lies asleep,And in his ear I'll holla 'Mortimer!'Nay,I'll have a starling shall be taught to speakNothing but 'Mortimer,' and give it himTo keep his anger still in motion.EARL OF WORCESTERHear you, cousin; a word.HOTSPURAll studies here I solemnly defy,Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke:And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales,But that I think his father loves him notAnd would be glad he met with some mischance,I would have him poison'd with a pot of ale.EARL OF WORCESTERFarewell, kinsman: I'll talk to youWhen you are better temper'd to attend.NORTHUMBERLANDWhy, what a wasp-stung and impatient foolArt thou to break into this woman's mood,Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!HOTSPURWhy, look you, I am whipp'd and scourged with rods,Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hearOf this vile politician, Bolingbroke.In Richard's time,--what do you call the place?--A plague upon it, it is in Gloucestershire;'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept,His uncle York; where I first bow'd my kneeUnto this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke,--'Sblood!--When you and he came back from Ravenspurgh.NORTHUMBERLANDAt Berkley castle.HOTSPURYou say true:Why, what a candy deal of courtesyThis fawning greyhound then did proffer me!Look,'when his infant fortune came to age,'And 'gentle Harry Percy,' and 'kind cousin;'O, the devil take such cozeners! God forgive me!Good uncle, tell your tale; I have done.EARL OF WORCESTERNay, if you have not, to it again;We will stay your leisure.HOTSPURI have done, i' faith.EARL OF WORCESTERThen once more to your Scottish prisoners.Deliver them up without their ransom straight,And make the Douglas' son your only meanFor powers in Scotland; which, for divers reasonsWhich I shall send you written, be assured,Will easily be granted. You, my lord,To NorthumberlandYour son in Scotland being thus employ'd,Shall secretly into the bosom creepOf that same noble prelate, well beloved,The archbishop.HOTSPUROf York, is it not?EARL OF WORCESTERTrue; who bears hardHis brother's death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop.I speak not this in estimation,As what I think might be, but what I knowIs ruminated, plotted and set down,And only stays but to behold the faceOf that occasion that shall bring it on.HOTSPURI smell it: upon my life, it will do well.NORTHUMBERLANDBefore the game is afoot, thou still let'st slip.HOTSPURWhy, it cannot choose but be a noble plot;And then the power of Scotland and of York,To join with Mortimer, ha?EARL OF WORCESTERAnd so they shall.HOTSPURIn faith, it is exceedingly well aim'd.EARL OF WORCESTERAnd 'tis no little reason bids us speed,To save our heads by raising of a head;For, bear ourselves as even as we can,The king will always think him in our debt,And think we think ourselves unsatisfied,Till he hath found a time to pay us home:And see already how he doth beginTo make us strangers to his looks of love.HOTSPURHe does, he does: we'll be revenged on him.EARL OF WORCESTERCousin, farewell: no further go in thisThan I by letters shall direct your course.When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,I'll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer;Where you and Douglas and our powers at once,As I will fashion it, shall happily meet,To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,Which now we hold at much uncertainty.NORTHUMBERLANDFarewell, good brother: we shall thrive, I trust.HOTSPURUncle, Adieu: O, let the hours be shortTill fields and blows and groans applaud our sport!ExeuntACT IISCENE I. Rochester. An inn yard.Enter a Carrier with a lantern in his handFirst CarrierHeigh-ho! an it be not four by the day, I'll behanged: Charles' wain is over the new chimney, andyet our horse not packed. What, ostler!Ostler[Within]   Anon, anon.First CarrierI prithee, Tom, beat Cut's saddle, put a few flocksin the point; poor jade, is wrung in the withers outof all cess.Enter another CarrierSecond CarrierPeas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and thatis the next way to give poor jades the bots: thishouse is turned upside down since Robin Ostler died.First CarrierPoor fellow, never joyed since the price of oatsrose; it was the death of him.Second CarrierI think this be the most villanous house in allLondon road for fleas: I am stung like a tench.First CarrierLike a tench! by the mass, there is ne'er a kingchristen could be better bit than I have been sincethe first cock.Second CarrierWhy, they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then weleak in your chimney; and your chamber-lie breedsfleas like a loach.First CarrierWhat, ostler! come away and be hanged!Second CarrierI have a gammon of bacon and two razors of ginger,to be delivered as far as Charing-cross.First CarrierGod's body! the turkeys in my pannier are quitestarved. What, ostler! A plague on thee! hast thounever an eye in thy head? canst not hear? An'twere not as good deed as drink, to break the pateon thee, I am a very villain. Come, and be hanged!hast thou no faith in thee?Enter GADSHILLGADSHILLGood morrow, carriers. What's o'clock?First CarrierI think it be two o'clock.GADSHILLI pray thee lend me thy lantern, to see my geldingin the stable.First CarrierNay, by God, soft; I know a trick worth two of that, i' faith.GADSHILLI pray thee, lend me thine.Second CarrierAy, when? can'st tell? Lend me thy lantern, quothhe? marry, I'll see thee hanged first.GADSHILLSirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?Second CarrierTime enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrantthee. Come, neighbour Mugs, we'll call up thegentleman: they will along with company, for theyhave great charge.Exeunt carriersGADSHILLWhat, ho! chamberlain!Chamberlain[Within]  At hand, quoth pick-purse.GADSHILLThat's even as fair as--at hand, quoth thechamberlain; for thou variest no more from pickingof purses than giving direction doth from labouring;thou layest the plot how.Enter ChamberlainChamberlainGood morrow, Master Gadshill. It holds current thatI told you yesternight: there's a franklin in thewild of Kent hath brought three hundred marks withhim in gold: I heard him tell it to one of hiscompany last night at supper; a kind of auditor; onethat hath abundance of charge too, God knows what.They are up already, and call for eggs and butter;they will away presently.GADSHILLSirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas'clerks, I'll give thee this neck.ChamberlainNo, I'll none of it: I pray thee keep that for thehangman; for I know thou worshippest St. Nicholasas truly as a man of falsehood may.GADSHILLWhat talkest thou to me of the hangman? if I hang,I'll make a fat pair of gallows; for if I hang, oldSir John hangs with me, and thou knowest he is nostarveling. Tut! there are other Trojans that thoudreamest not of, the which for sport sake arecontent to do the profession some grace; that would,if matters should be looked into, for their owncredit sake, make all whole. I am joined with nofoot-land rakers, no long-staff sixpenny strikers,none of these mad mustachio purple-hued malt-worms;but with nobility and tranquillity, burgomasters andgreat oneyers, such as can hold in, such as willstrike sooner than speak, and speak sooner thandrink, and drink sooner than pray: and yet, zounds,I lie; for they pray continually to their saint, thecommonwealth; or rather, not pray to her, but preyon her, for they ride up and down on her and makeher their boots.ChamberlainWhat, the commonwealth their boots? will she holdout water in foul way?GADSHILLShe will, she will; justice hath liquored her. Westeal as in a castle, cocksure; we have the receiptof fern-seed, we walk invisible.ChamberlainNay, by my faith, I think you are more beholding tothe night than to fern-seed for your walking invisible.GADSHILLGive me thy hand: thou shalt have a share in ourpurchase, as I am a true man.ChamberlainNay, rather let me have it, as you are a false thief.GADSHILLGo to; 'homo' is a common name to all men. Bid theostler bring my gelding out of the stable. Farewell,you muddy knave.ExeuntSCENE II. The highway, near Gadshill.Enter PRINCE HENRY and POINSPOINSCome, shelter, shelter: I have removed Falstaff'shorse, and he frets like a gummed velvet.PRINCE HENRYStand close.Enter FALSTAFFFALSTAFFPoins! Poins, and be hanged! Poins!PRINCE HENRYPeace, ye fat-kidneyed rascal! what a brawling dostthou keep!FALSTAFFWhere's Poins, Hal?PRINCE HENRYHe is walked up to the top of the hill: I'll go seek him.FALSTAFFI am accursed to rob in that thief's company: therascal hath removed my horse, and tied him I knownot where. If I travel but four foot by the squierfurther afoot, I shall break my wind. Well, I doubtnot but to die a fair death for all this, if I'scape hanging for killing that rogue. I haveforsworn his company hourly any time this two andtwenty years, and yet I am bewitched with therogue's company. If the rascal hath not given memedicines to make me love him, I'll be hanged; itcould not be else: I have drunk medicines. Poins!Hal! a plague upon you both! Bardolph! Peto!I'll starve ere I'll rob a foot further. An 'twerenot as good a deed as drink, to turn true man and toleave these rogues, I am the veriest varlet thatever chewed with a tooth. Eight yards of unevenground is threescore and ten miles afoot with me;and the stony-hearted villains know it well enough:a plague upon it when thieves cannot be true one to another!They whistleWhew! A plague upon you all! Give me my horse, yourogues; give me my horse, and be hanged!PRINCE HENRYPeace, ye fat-guts! lie down; lay thine ear closeto the ground and list if thou canst hear the treadof travellers.FALSTAFFHave you any levers to lift me up again, being down?'Sblood, I'll not bear mine own flesh so far afootagain for all the coin in thy father's exchequer.What a plague mean ye to colt me thus?PRINCE HENRYThou liest; thou art not colted, thou art uncolted.FALSTAFFI prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my horse,good king's son.PRINCE HENRYOut, ye rogue! shall I be your ostler?FALSTAFFGo, hang thyself in thine own heir-apparentgarters! If I be ta'en, I'll peach for this. An Ihave not ballads made on you all and sung to filthytunes, let a cup of sack be my poison: when a jestis so forward, and afoot too! I hate it.Enter GADSHILL, BARDOLPH and PETOGADSHILLStand.FALSTAFFSo I do, against my will.POINSO, 'tis our setter: I know his voice. Bardolph,what news?BARDOLPHCase ye, case ye; on with your vizards: there 'smoney of the king's coming down the hill; 'tis goingto the king's exchequer.FALSTAFFYou lie, ye rogue; 'tis going to the king's tavern.GADSHILLThere's enough to make us all.FALSTAFFTo be hanged.PRINCE HENRYSirs, you four shall front them in the narrow lane;Ned Poins and I will walk lower: if they 'scapefrom your encounter, then they light on us.PETOHow many be there of them?GADSHILLSome eight or ten.FALSTAFF'Zounds, will they not rob us?PRINCE HENRYWhat, a coward, Sir John Paunch?FALSTAFFIndeed, I am not John of Gaunt, your grandfather;but yet no coward, Hal.PRINCE HENRYWell, we leave that to the proof.POINSSirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge:when thou needest him, there thou shalt find him.Farewell, and stand fast.FALSTAFFNow cannot I strike him, if I should be hanged.PRINCE HENRYNed, where are our disguises?POINSHere, hard by: stand close.Exeunt PRINCE HENRY and POINSFALSTAFFNow, my masters, happy man be his dole, say I:every man to his business.Enter the TravellersFirst TravellerCome, neighbour: the boy shall lead our horses downthe hill; we'll walk afoot awhile, and ease our legs.ThievesStand!TravellersJesus bless us!FALSTAFFStrike; down with them; cut the villains' throats:ah! whoreson caterpillars! bacon-fed knaves! theyhate us youth: down with them: fleece them.TravellersO, we are undone, both we and ours for ever!FALSTAFFHang ye, gorbellied knaves, are ye undone? No, yefat chuffs: I would your store were here! On,bacons, on! What, ye knaves! young men must live.You are Grand-jurors, are ye? we'll jure ye, 'faith.Here they rob them and bind them. ExeuntRe-enter PRINCE HENRY and POINSPRINCE HENRYThe thieves have bound the true men. Now could thouand I rob the thieves and go merrily to London, itwould be argument for a week, laughter for a monthand a good jest for ever.POINSStand close; I hear them coming.Enter the Thieves againFALSTAFFCome, my masters, let us share, and then to  horsebefore day. An the Prince and Poins be not twoarrant cowards, there's no equity stirring: there'sno more valour in that Poins than in a wild-duck.PRINCE HENRYYour money!POINSVillains!As they are sharing, the Prince and Poins set upon  them; they all run away; and Falstaff, after a blow or two, runs away too, leaving the booty behind themPRINCE HENRYGot with much ease. Now merrily to horse:The thieves are all scatter'd and possess'd with fearSo strongly that they dare not meet each other;Each takes his fellow for an officer.Away, good Ned. Falstaff sweats to death,And lards the lean earth as he walks along:Were 't not for laughing, I should pity him.POINSHow the rogue roar'd!ExeuntSCENE III. Warkworth castleEnter HOTSPUR, solus, reading a letterHOTSPUR'But for mine own part, my lord, I could be wellcontented to be there, in respect of the love I bearyour house.' He could be contented: why is he not,then? In respect of the love he bears our house:he shows in this, he loves his own barn better thanhe loves our house. Let me see some more. 'Thepurpose you undertake is dangerous;'--why, that'scertain: 'tis dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, todrink; but I tell you, my lord fool, out of thisnettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety. 'Thepurpose you undertake is dangerous; the friends youhave named uncertain; the time itself unsorted; andyour whole plot too light for the counterpoise of sogreat an opposition.' Say you so, say you so? I sayunto you again, you are a shallow cowardly hind, andyou lie.  What a lack-brain is this! By the Lord,our plot is a good plot as ever was laid; ourfriends true and constant: a good plot, goodfriends, and full of expectation; an excellent plot,very good friends. What a frosty-spirited rogue isthis! Why, my lord of York commends the plot and thegeneral course of action. 'Zounds, an I were now bythis rascal, I could brain him with his lady's fan.Is there not my father, my uncle and myself? lordEdmund Mortimer, My lord of York and Owen Glendower?is there not besides the Douglas? have I not alltheir letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of thenext month? and are they not some of them setforward already? What a pagan rascal is this! aninfidel! Ha! you shall see now in very sincerityof fear and cold heart, will he to the king and layopen all our proceedings. O, I could divide myselfand go to buffets, for moving such a dish ofskim milk with so honourable an action! Hang him!let him tell the king: we are prepared. I will setforward to-night.Enter LADY PERCYHow now, Kate! I must leave you within these two hours.LADY PERCYO, my good lord, why are you thus alone?For what offence have I this fortnight beenA banish'd woman from my Harry's bed?Tell me, sweet lord, what is't that takes from theeThy stomach, pleasure and thy golden sleep?Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth,And start so often when thou sit'st alone?Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks;And given my treasures and my rights of theeTo thick-eyed musing and cursed melancholy?In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watch'd,And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars;Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed;Cry 'Courage! to the field!' And thou hast talk'dOf sallies and retires, of trenches, tents,Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets,Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin,Of prisoners' ransom and of soldiers slain,And all the currents of a heady fight.Thy spirit within thee hath been so at warAnd thus hath so bestirr'd thee in thy sleep,That beads of sweat have stood upon thy browLike bubbles in a late-disturbed stream;And in thy face strange motions have appear'd,Such as we see when men restrain their breathOn some great sudden hest. O, what portents are these?Some heavy business hath my lord in hand,And I must know it, else he loves me not.HOTSPURWhat, ho!Enter ServantIs Gilliams with the packet gone?ServantHe is, my lord, an hour ago.HOTSPURHath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?ServantOne horse, my lord, he brought even now.HOTSPURWhat horse? a roan, a crop-ear, is it not?ServantIt is, my lord.HOTSPURThat roan shall by my throne.Well, I will back him straight: O esperance!Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.Exit ServantLADY PERCYBut hear you, my lord.HOTSPURWhat say'st thou, my lady?LADY PERCYWhat is it carries you away?HOTSPURWhy, my horse, my love, my horse.LADY PERCYOut, you mad-headed ape!A weasel hath not such a deal of spleenAs you are toss'd with. In faith,I'll know your business, Harry, that I will.I fear my brother Mortimer doth stirAbout his title, and hath sent for youTo line his enterprise: but if you go,--HOTSPURSo far afoot, I shall be weary, love.LADY PERCYCome, come, you paraquito, answer meDirectly unto this question that I ask:In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry,An if thou wilt not tell me all things true.HOTSPURAway,Away, you trifler! Love! I love thee not,I care not for thee, Kate: this is no worldTo play with mammets and to tilt with lips:We must have bloody noses and crack'd crowns,And pass them current too. God's me, my horse!What say'st thou, Kate? what would'st thouhave with me?LADY PERCYDo you not love me? do you not, indeed?Well, do not then; for since you love me not,I will not love myself. Do you not love me?Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.HOTSPURCome, wilt thou see me ride?And when I am on horseback, I will swearI love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate;I must not have you henceforth question meWhither I go, nor reason whereabout:Whither I must, I must; and, to conclude,This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate.I know you wise, but yet no farther wiseThan Harry Percy's wife: constant you are,But yet a woman: and for secrecy,No lady closer; for I well believeThou wilt not utter what thou dost not know;And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.LADY PERCYHow! so far?HOTSPURNot an inch further. But hark you, Kate:Whither I go, thither shall you go too;To-day will I set forth, to-morrow you.Will this content you, Kate?LADY PERCYIt must of force.ExeuntSCENE IV. The Boar's-Head Tavern, Eastcheap.Enter PRINCE HENRY and POINSPRINCE HENRYNed, prithee, come out of that fat room, and lend methy hand to laugh a little.POINSWhere hast been, Hal?PRINCE HENRYWith three or four loggerheads amongst three or fourscore hogsheads. I have sounded the verybase-string of humility. Sirrah, I am sworn brotherto a leash of drawers; and can call them all bytheir christen names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis.They take it already upon their salvation, thatthough I be but the prince of Wales, yet I am kingof courtesy; and tell me flatly I am no proud Jack,like Falstaff, but a Corinthian, a lad of mettle, agood boy, by the Lord, so they call me, and when Iam king of England, I shall command all the goodlads in Eastcheap. They call drinking deep, dyeingscarlet; and when you breathe in your watering, theycry  'hem!' and bid you play it off. To conclude, Iam so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour,that I can drink with any tinker in his own languageduring my life. I tell thee, Ned, thou hast lostmuch honour, that thou wert not with me in this sweetaction. But, sweet Ned,--to sweeten which name ofNed, I give thee this pennyworth of sugar, clappedeven now into my hand by an under-skinker, one thatnever spake other English in his life than 'Eightshillings and sixpence' and 'You are welcome,' withthis shrill addition, 'Anon, anon, sir! Score a pintof bastard in the Half-Moon,' or so. But, Ned, todrive away the time till Falstaff come, I prithee,do thou stand in some by-room, while I question mypuny drawer to what end he gave me the sugar; and dothou never leave calling 'Francis,' that his taleto me may be nothing but 'Anon.' Step aside, andI'll show thee a precedent.POINSFrancis!PRINCE HENRYThou art perfect.POINSFrancis!Exit POINSEnter FRANCISFRANCISAnon, anon, sir. Look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralph.PRINCE HENRYCome hither, Francis.FRANCISMy lord?PRINCE HENRYHow long hast thou to serve, Francis?FRANCISForsooth, five years, and as much as to--POINS[Within]  Francis!FRANCISAnon, anon, sir.PRINCE HENRYFive year! by'r lady, a long lease for the clinkingof pewter. But, Francis, darest thou be so valiantas to play the coward with thy indenture and show ita fair pair of heels and run from it?FRANCISO Lord, sir, I'll be sworn upon all the books inEngland, I could find in my heart.POINS[Within]  Francis!FRANCISAnon, sir.PRINCE HENRYHow old art thou, Francis?FRANCISLet me see--about Michaelmas next I shall be--POINS[Within]  Francis!FRANCISAnon, sir. Pray stay a little, my lord.PRINCE HENRYNay, but hark you, Francis: for the sugar thougavest me,'twas a pennyworth, wast't not?FRANCISO Lord, I would it had been two!PRINCE HENRYI will give thee for it a thousand pound: ask mewhen thou wilt, and thou shalt have it.POINS[Within]  Francis!FRANCISAnon, anon.PRINCE HENRYAnon, Francis? No, Francis; but to-morrow, Francis;or, Francis, o' Thursday; or indeed, Francis, whenthou wilt. But, Francis!FRANCISMy lord?PRINCE HENRYWilt thou rob this leathern jerkin, crystal-button,not-pated, agate-ring, puke-stocking, caddis-garter,smooth-tongue, Spanish-pouch,--FRANCISO Lord, sir, who do you mean?PRINCE HENRYWhy, then, your brown bastard is your only drink;for look you, Francis, your white canvas doubletwill sully: in Barbary, sir, it cannot come to so much.FRANCISWhat, sir?POINS[Within]  Francis!PRINCE HENRYAway, you rogue! dost thou not hear them call?Here they both call him; the drawer stands amazed, not knowing which way to goEnter VintnerVintnerWhat, standest thou still, and hearest such acalling? Look to the guests within.Exit FrancisMy lord, old Sir John, with half-a-dozen more, areat the door: shall I let them in?PRINCE HENRYLet them alone awhile, and then open the door.Exit VintnerPoins!Re-enter POINSPOINSAnon, anon, sir.PRINCE HENRYSirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are atthe door: shall we be merry?POINSAs merry as crickets, my lad. But hark ye; whatcunning match have you made with this jest of thedrawer? come, what's the issue?PRINCE HENRYI am now of all humours that have showed themselveshumours since the old days of goodman Adam to thepupil age of this present twelve o'clock at midnight.Re-enter FRANCISWhat's o'clock, Francis?FRANCISAnon, anon, sir.ExitPRINCE HENRYThat ever this fellow should have fewer words than aparrot, and yet the son of a woman! His industry isupstairs and downstairs; his eloquence the parcel ofa reckoning. I am not yet of Percy's mind, theHotspur of the north; he that kills me some six orseven dozen of Scots at a breakfast, washes hishands, and says to his wife 'Fie upon this quietlife! I want work.' 'O my sweet Harry,' says she,'how many hast thou killed to-day?' 'Give my roanhorse a drench,' says he; and answers 'Somefourteen,' an hour after; 'a trifle, a trifle.' Iprithee, call in Falstaff: I'll play Percy, andthat damned brawn shall play Dame Mortimer hiswife. 'Rivo!' says the drunkard. Call in ribs, call in tallow.Enter FALSTAFF, GADSHILL, BARDOLPH, and PETO; FRANCIS following with winePOINSWelcome, Jack: where hast thou been?FALSTAFFA plague of all cowards, I say, and a vengeance too!marry, and amen! Give me a cup of sack, boy. Ere Ilead this life long, I'll sew nether stocks and mendthem and foot them too. A plague of all cowards!Give me a cup of sack, rogue. Is there no virtue extant?He drinksPRINCE HENRYDidst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter?pitiful-hearted Titan, that melted at the sweet taleof the sun's! if thou didst, then behold that compound.FALSTAFFYou rogue, here's lime in this sack too: there isnothing but roguery to be found in villanous man:yet a coward is worse than a cup of sack with limein it. A villanous coward! Go thy ways, old Jack;die when thou wilt, if manhood, good manhood, benot forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I ashotten herring. There live not three good menunhanged in England; and one of them is fat andgrows old: God help the while! a bad world, I say.I would I were a weaver; I could sing psalms or anything. A plague of all cowards, I say still.PRINCE HENRYHow now, wool-sack! what mutter you?FALSTAFFA king's son! If I do not beat thee out of thykingdom with a dagger of lath, and drive all thysubjects afore thee like a flock of wild-geese,I'll never wear hair on my face more. You Prince of Wales!PRINCE HENRYWhy, you whoreson round man, what's the matter?FALSTAFFAre not you a coward? answer me to that: and Poins there?POINS'Zounds, ye fat paunch, an ye call me coward, by theLord, I'll stab thee.FALSTAFFI call thee coward! I'll see thee damned ere I callthee coward: but I would give a thousand pound Icould run as fast as thou canst. You are straightenough in the shoulders, you care not who sees yourback: call you that backing of your friends? Aplague upon such backing! give me them that willface me. Give me a cup of sack: I am a rogue, if Idrunk to-day.PRINCE HENRYO villain! thy lips are scarce wiped since thoudrunkest last.FALSTAFFAll's one for that.He drinksA plague of all cowards, still say I.PRINCE HENRYWhat's the matter?FALSTAFFWhat's the matter! there be four of us here haveta'en a thousand pound this day morning.PRINCE HENRYWhere is it, Jack? where is it?FALSTAFFWhere is it! taken from us it is: a hundred uponpoor four of us.PRINCE HENRYWhat, a hundred, man?FALSTAFFI am a rogue, if I were not at half-sword with adozen of them two hours together. I have 'scaped bymiracle. I am eight times thrust through thedoublet, four through the hose; my buckler cutthrough and through; my sword hacked like ahand-saw--ecce signum! I never dealt better sinceI was a man: all would not do. A plague of allcowards! Let them speak: if they speak more orless than truth, they are villains and the sons of darkness.PRINCE HENRYSpeak, sirs; how was it?GADSHILLWe four set upon some dozen--FALSTAFFSixteen at least, my lord.GADSHILLAnd bound them.PETONo, no, they were not bound.FALSTAFFYou rogue, they were bound, every man of them; or Iam a Jew else, an Ebrew Jew.GADSHILLAs we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us--FALSTAFFAnd unbound the rest, and then come in the other.PRINCE HENRYWhat, fought you with them all?FALSTAFFAll! I know not what you call all; but if I foughtnot with fifty of them, I am a bunch of radish: ifthere were not two or three and fifty upon poor oldJack, then am I no two-legged creature.PRINCE HENRYPray God you have not murdered some of them.FALSTAFFNay, that's past praying for: I have peppered twoof them; two I am sure I have paid, two roguesin buckram suits. I tell thee what, Hal, if I tellthee a lie, spit in my face, call me horse. Thouknowest my old ward; here I lay and thus I bore mypoint. Four rogues in buckram let drive at me--PRINCE HENRYWhat, four? thou saidst but two even now.FALSTAFFFour, Hal; I told thee four.POINSAy, ay, he said four.FALSTAFFThese four came all a-front, and mainly thrust atme. I made me no more ado but took all their sevenpoints in my target, thus.PRINCE HENRYSeven? why, there were but four even now.FALSTAFFIn buckram?POINSAy, four, in buckram suits.FALSTAFFSeven, by these hilts, or I am a villain else.PRINCE HENRYPrithee, let him alone; we shall have more anon.FALSTAFFDost thou hear me, Hal?PRINCE HENRYAy, and mark thee too, Jack.FALSTAFFDo so, for it is worth the listening to. These ninein buckram that I told thee of--PRINCE HENRYSo, two more already.FALSTAFFTheir points being broken,--POINSDown fell their hose.FALSTAFFBegan to give me ground: but I followed me close,came in foot and hand; and with a thought seven ofthe eleven I paid.PRINCE HENRYO monstrous! eleven buckram men grown out of two!FALSTAFFBut, as the devil would have it, three misbegottenknaves in Kendal green came at my back and let driveat me; for it was so dark, Hal, that thou couldstnot see thy hand.PRINCE HENRYThese lies are like their father that begets them;gross as a mountain, open, palpable. Why, thouclay-brained guts, thou knotty-pated fool, thouwhoreson, obscene, grease tallow-catch,--FALSTAFFWhat, art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truththe truth?PRINCE HENRYWhy, how couldst thou know these men in Kendalgreen, when it was so dark thou couldst not see thyhand? come, tell us your reason: what sayest thou to this?POINSCome, your reason, Jack, your reason.FALSTAFFWhat, upon compulsion? 'Zounds, an I were at thestrappado, or all the racks in the world, I wouldnot tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason oncompulsion! If reasons were as plentiful asblackberries, I would give no man a reason uponcompulsion, I.PRINCE HENRYI'll be no longer guilty of this sin; this sanguinecoward, this bed-presser, this horseback-breaker,this huge hill of flesh,--FALSTAFF'Sblood, you starveling, you elf-skin, you driedneat's tongue, you bull's pizzle, you stock-fish! Ofor breath to utter what is like thee! youtailor's-yard, you sheath, you bowcase; you vilestanding-tuck,--PRINCE HENRYWell, breathe awhile, and then to it again: andwhen thou hast tired thyself in base comparisons,hear me speak but this.POINSMark, Jack.PRINCE HENRYWe two saw you four set on four and bound them, andwere masters of their wealth. Mark now, how a plaintale shall put you down. Then did we two set on youfour; and, with a word, out-faced you from yourprize, and have it; yea, and can show it you here inthe house: and, Falstaff, you carried your gutsaway as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roaredfor mercy and still run and roared, as ever I heardbull-calf. What a slave art thou, to hack thy swordas thou hast done, and then say it was in fight!What trick, what device, what starting-hole, canstthou now find out to hide thee from this open andapparent shame?POINSCome, let's hear, Jack; what trick hast thou now?FALSTAFFBy the Lord, I knew ye as well as he that made ye.Why, hear you, my masters: was it for me to kill theheir-apparent? should I turn upon the true prince?why, thou knowest I am as valiant as Hercules: butbeware instinct; the lion will not touch the trueprince. Instinct is a great matter; I was now acoward on instinct. I shall think the better ofmyself and thee during my life; I for a valiantlion, and thou for a true prince. But, by the Lord,lads, I am glad you have the money. Hostess, clapto the doors: watch to-night, pray to-morrow.Gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all the titlesof good fellowship come to you! What, shall we bemerry? shall we have a play extempore?PRINCE HENRYContent; and the argument shall be thy running away.FALSTAFFAh, no more of that, Hal, an thou lovest me!Enter HostessHostessO Jesu, my lord the prince!PRINCE HENRYHow now, my lady the hostess! what sayest thou tome?HostessMarry, my lord, there is a nobleman of the court atdoor would speak with you: he says he comes fromyour father.PRINCE HENRYGive him as much as will make him a royal man, andsend him back again to my mother.FALSTAFFWhat manner of man is he?HostessAn old man.FALSTAFFWhat doth gravity out of his bed at midnight? ShallI give him his answer?PRINCE HENRYPrithee, do, Jack.FALSTAFF'Faith, and I'll send him packing.Exit FALSTAFFPRINCE HENRYNow, sirs: by'r lady, you fought fair; so did you,Peto; so did you, Bardolph: you are lions too, youran away upon instinct, you will not touch the trueprince; no, fie!BARDOLPH'Faith, I ran when I saw others run.PRINCE HENRY'Faith, tell me now in earnest, how came Falstaff'ssword so hacked?PETOWhy, he hacked it with his dagger, and said he wouldswear truth out of England but he would make youbelieve it was done in fight, and persuaded us to do the like.BARDOLPHYea, and to tickle our noses with spear-grass tomake them bleed, and then to beslubber our garmentswith it and swear it was the blood of true men. Idid that I did not this seven year before, I blushedto hear his monstrous devices.PRINCE HENRYO villain, thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen yearsago, and wert taken with the manner, and ever sincethou hast blushed extempore. Thou hadst fire andsword on thy side, and yet thou rannest away: whatinstinct hadst thou for it?BARDOLPHMy lord, do you see these meteors? do you beholdthese exhalations?PRINCE HENRYI do.BARDOLPHWhat think you they portend?PRINCE HENRYHot livers and cold purses.BARDOLPHCholer, my lord, if rightly taken.PRINCE HENRYNo, if rightly taken, halter.Re-enter FALSTAFFHere comes lean Jack, here comes bare-bone.How now, my sweet creature of bombast!How long is't ago, Jack, since thou sawest thine own knee?FALSTAFFMy own knee! when I was about thy years, Hal, I wasnot an eagle's talon in the waist; I could havecrept into any alderman's thumb-ring: a plague ofsighing and grief! it blows a man up like abladder. There's villanous news abroad: here wasSir John Bracy from your father; you must to thecourt in the morning. That same mad fellow of thenorth, Percy, and he of Wales, that gave Amamon thebastinado and made Lucifer cuckold and swore thedevil his true liegeman upon the cross of a Welshhook--what a plague call you him?POINSO, Glendower.FALSTAFFOwen, Owen, the same; and his son-in-law Mortimer,and old Northumberland, and that sprightly Scot ofScots, Douglas, that runs o' horseback up a hillperpendicular,--PRINCE HENRYHe that rides at high speed and with his pistolkills a sparrow flying.FALSTAFFYou have hit it.PRINCE HENRYSo did he never the sparrow.FALSTAFFWell, that rascal hath good mettle in him; he will not run.PRINCE HENRYWhy, what a rascal art thou then, to praise him sofor running!FALSTAFFO' horseback, ye cuckoo; but afoot he will not budge a foot.PRINCE HENRYYes, Jack, upon instinct.FALSTAFFI grant ye, upon instinct. Well, he is there too,and one Mordake, and a thousand blue-caps more:Worcester is stolen away to-night; thy father'sbeard is turned white with the news: you may buyland now as cheap as stinking mackerel.PRINCE HENRYWhy, then, it is like, if there come a hot June andthis civil buffeting hold, we shall buy maidenheadsas they buy hob-nails, by the hundreds.FALSTAFFBy the mass, lad, thou sayest true; it is like weshall have good trading that way. But tell me, Hal,art not thou horrible afeard? thou beingheir-apparent, could the world pick thee out threesuch enemies again as that fiend Douglas, thatspirit Percy, and that devil Glendower? Art thounot horribly afraid? doth not thy blood thrill atit?PRINCE HENRYNot a whit, i' faith; I lack some of thy instinct.FALSTAFFWell, thou wert be horribly chid tomorrow when thoucomest to thy father: if thou love me, practise an answer.PRINCE HENRYDo thou stand for my father, and examine me upon theparticulars of my life.FALSTAFFShall I? content: this chair shall be my state,this dagger my sceptre, and this cushion my crown.PRINCE HENRYThy state is taken for a joined-stool, thy goldensceptre for a leaden dagger, and thy precious richcrown for a pitiful bald crown!FALSTAFFWell, an the fire of grace be not quite out of thee,now shalt thou be moved. Give me a cup of sack tomake my eyes look red, that it may be thought I havewept; for I must speak in passion, and I will do itin King Cambyses' vein.PRINCE HENRYWell, here is my leg.FALSTAFFAnd here is my speech. Stand aside, nobility.HostessO Jesu, this is excellent sport, i' faith!FALSTAFFWeep not, sweet queen; for trickling tears are vain.HostessO, the father, how he holds his countenance!FALSTAFFFor God's sake, lords, convey my tristful queen;For tears do stop the flood-gates of her eyes.HostessO Jesu, he doth it as like one of these harlotryplayers as ever I see!FALSTAFFPeace, good pint-pot; peace, good tickle-brain.Harry, I do not only marvel where thou spendest thytime, but also how thou art accompanied: for thoughthe camomile, the more it is trodden on the fasterit grows, yet youth, the more it is wasted thesooner it wears. That thou art my son, I havepartly thy mother's word, partly my own opinion,but chiefly a villanous trick of thine eye and afoolish-hanging of thy nether lip, that doth warrantme. If then thou be son to me, here lies the point;why, being son to me, art thou so pointed at? Shallthe blessed sun of heaven prove a micher and eatblackberries? a question not to be asked. Shallthe sun of England prove a thief and take purses? aquestion to be asked. There is a thing, Harry,which thou hast often heard of and it is known tomany in our land by the name of pitch: this pitch,as ancient writers do report, doth defile; so doththe company thou keepest: for, Harry, now I do notspeak to thee in drink but in tears, not inpleasure but in passion, not in words only, but inwoes also: and yet there is a virtuous man whom Ihave often noted in thy company, but I know not his name.PRINCE HENRYWhat manner of man, an it like your majesty?FALSTAFFA goodly portly man, i' faith, and a corpulent; of acheerful look, a pleasing eye and a most noblecarriage; and, as I think, his age some fifty, or,by'r lady, inclining to three score; and now Iremember me, his name is Falstaff: if that manshould be lewdly given, he deceiveth me; for, Harry,I see virtue in his looks. If then the tree may beknown by the fruit, as the fruit by the tree, then,peremptorily I speak it, there is virtue in thatFalstaff: him keep with, the rest banish. And tellme now, thou naughty varlet, tell me, where hastthou been this month?PRINCE HENRYDost thou speak like a king? Do thou stand for me,and I'll play my father.FALSTAFFDepose me? if thou dost it half so gravely, somajestically, both in word and matter, hang me up bythe heels for a rabbit-sucker or a poulter's hare.PRINCE HENRYWell, here I am set.FALSTAFFAnd here I stand: judge, my masters.PRINCE HENRYNow, Harry, whence come you?FALSTAFFMy noble lord, from Eastcheap.PRINCE HENRYThe complaints I hear of thee are grievous.FALSTAFF'Sblood, my lord, they are false: nay, I'll tickleye for a young prince, i' faith.PRINCE HENRYSwearest thou, ungracious boy? henceforth ne'er lookon me. Thou art violently carried away from grace:there is a devil haunts thee in the likeness of anold fat man; a tun of man is thy companion. Whydost thou converse with that trunk of humours, thatbolting-hutch of beastliness, that swollen parcelof dropsies, that huge bombard of sack, that stuffedcloak-bag of guts, that roasted Manningtree ox withthe pudding in his belly, that reverend vice, thatgrey iniquity, that father ruffian, that vanity inyears? Wherein is he good, but to taste sack anddrink it? wherein neat and cleanly, but to carve acapon and eat it? wherein cunning, but in craft?wherein crafty, but in villany? wherein villanous,but in all things? wherein worthy, but in nothing?FALSTAFFI would your grace would take me with you: whommeans your grace?PRINCE HENRYThat villanous abominable misleader of youth,Falstaff, that old white-bearded Satan.FALSTAFFMy lord, the man I know.PRINCE HENRYI know thou dost.FALSTAFFBut to say I know more harm in him than in myself,were to say more than I know. That he is old, themore the pity, his white hairs do witness it; butthat he is, saving your reverence, a whoremaster,that I utterly deny. If sack and sugar be a fault,God help the wicked! if to be old and merry be asin, then many an old host that I know is damned: ifto be fat be to be hated, then Pharaoh's lean kineare to be loved. No, my good lord; banish Peto,banish Bardolph, banish Poins: but for sweet JackFalstaff, kind Jack Falstaff, true Jack Falstaff,valiant Jack Falstaff, and therefore more valiant,being, as he is, old Jack Falstaff, banish not himthy Harry's company, banish not him thy Harry'scompany: banish plump Jack, and banish all the world.PRINCE HENRYI do, I will.A knocking heardExeunt Hostess, FRANCIS, and BARDOLPHRe-enter BARDOLPH, runningBARDOLPHO, my lord, my lord! the sheriff with a mostmonstrous watch is at the door.FALSTAFFOut, ye rogue! Play out the play: I have much tosay in the behalf of that Falstaff.Re-enter the HostessHostessO Jesu, my lord, my lord!PRINCE HENRYHeigh, heigh! the devil rides upon a fiddlestick:what's the matter?HostessThe sheriff and all the watch are at the door: theyare come to search the house. Shall I let them in?FALSTAFFDost thou hear, Hal? never call a true piece ofgold a counterfeit: thou art essentially mad,without seeming so.PRINCE HENRYAnd thou a natural coward, without instinct.FALSTAFFI deny your major: if you will deny the sheriff,so; if not, let him enter: if I become not a cartas well as another man, a plague on my bringing up!I hope I shall as soon be strangled with a halter as another.PRINCE HENRYGo, hide thee behind the arras: the rest walk upabove. Now, my masters, for a true face and goodconscience.FALSTAFFBoth which I have had: but their date is out, andtherefore I'll hide me.PRINCE HENRYCall in the sheriff.Exeunt all except PRINCE HENRY and PETOEnter Sheriff and the CarrierNow, master sheriff, what is your will with me?SheriffFirst, pardon me, my lord. A hue and cryHath follow'd certain men unto this house.PRINCE HENRYWhat men?SheriffOne of them is well known, my gracious lord,A gross fat man.CarrierAs fat as butter.PRINCE HENRYThe man, I do assure you, is not here;For I myself at this time have employ'd him.And, sheriff, I will engage my word to theeThat I will, by to-morrow dinner-time,Send him to answer thee, or any man,For any thing he shall be charged withal:And so let me entreat you leave the house.SheriffI will, my lord. There are two gentlemenHave in this robbery lost three hundred marks.PRINCE HENRYIt may be so: if he have robb'd these men,He shall be answerable; and so farewell.SheriffGood night, my noble lord.PRINCE HENRYI think it is good morrow, is it not?SheriffIndeed, my lord, I think it be two o'clock.Exeunt Sheriff and CarrierPRINCE HENRYThis oily rascal is known as well as Paul's. Go,call him forth.PETOFalstaff!--Fast asleep behind the arras, andsnorting like a horse.PRINCE HENRYHark, how hard he fetches breath. Search his pockets.He searcheth his pockets, and findeth certain papersWhat hast thou found?PETONothing but papers, my lord.PRINCE HENRYLet's see what they be: read them.PETO[Reads]  Item, A capon,. . 2s. 2d.Item, Sauce,. . . 4d.Item, Sack, two gallons, 5s. 8d.Item, Anchovies and sack after supper, 2s. 6d.Item, Bread,        ob.PRINCE HENRYO monstrous! but one half-penny-worth of bread tothis intolerable deal of sack! What there is else,keep close; we'll read it at more advantage: therelet him sleep till day. I'll to the court in themorning. We must all to the wars, and thy placeshall be honourable. I'll procure this fat rogue acharge of foot; and I know his death will be amarch of twelve-score. The money shall be paidback again with advantage. Be with me betimes inthe morning; and so, good morrow, Peto.ExeuntPETOGood morrow, good my lord.ACT IIISCENE I. Bangor. The Archdeacon's house.Enter HOTSPUR, WORCESTER, MORTIMER, and GLENDOWERMORTIMERThese promises are fair, the parties sure,And our induction full of prosperous hope.HOTSPURLord Mortimer, and cousin Glendower,Will you sit down?And uncle Worcester: a plague upon it!I have forgot the map.GLENDOWERNo, here it is.Sit, cousin Percy; sit, good cousin Hotspur,For by that name as oft as LancasterDoth speak of you, his cheek looks pale and withA rising sigh he wisheth you in heaven.HOTSPURAnd you in hell, as oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.GLENDOWERI cannot blame him: at my nativityThe front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,Of burning cressets; and at my birthThe frame and huge foundation of the earthShaked like a coward.HOTSPURWhy, so it would have done at the same season, ifyour mother's cat had but kittened, though yourselfhad never been born.GLENDOWERI say the earth did shake when I was born.HOTSPURAnd I say the earth was not of my mind,If you suppose as fearing you it shook.GLENDOWERThe heavens were all on fire, the earth did tremble.HOTSPURO, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire,And not in fear of your nativity.Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forthIn strange eruptions; oft the teeming earthIs with a kind of colic pinch'd and vex'dBy the imprisoning of unruly windWithin her womb; which, for enlargement striving,Shakes the old beldam earth and topples downSteeples and moss-grown towers. At your birthOur grandam earth, having this distemperature,In passion shook.GLENDOWERCousin, of many menI do not bear these crossings. Give me leaveTo tell you once again that at my birthThe front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,The goats ran from the mountains, and the herdsWere strangely clamorous to the frighted fields.These signs have mark'd me extraordinary;And all the courses of my life do showI am not in the roll of common men.Where is he living, clipp'd in with the seaThat chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales,Which calls me pupil, or hath read to me?And bring him out that is but woman's sonCan trace me in the tedious ways of artAnd hold me pace in deep experiments.HOTSPURI think there's no man speaks better Welsh.I'll to dinner.MORTIMERPeace, cousin Percy; you will make him mad.GLENDOWERI can call spirits from the vasty deep.HOTSPURWhy, so can I, or so can any man;But will they come when you do call for them?GLENDOWERWhy, I can teach you, cousin, to commandThe devil.HOTSPURAnd I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devilBy telling truth: tell truth and shame the devil.If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,And I'll be sworn I have power to shame him hence.O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil!MORTIMERCome, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.GLENDOWERThree times hath Henry Bolingbroke made headAgainst my power; thrice from the banks of WyeAnd sandy-bottom'd Severn have I sent himBootless home and weather-beaten back.HOTSPURHome without boots, and in foul weather too!How 'scapes he agues, in the devil's name?GLENDOWERCome, here's the map: shall we divide our rightAccording to our threefold order ta'en?MORTIMERThe archdeacon hath divided itInto three limits very equally:England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,By south and east is to my part assign'd:All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,And all the fertile land within that bound,To Owen Glendower: and, dear coz, to youThe remnant northward, lying off from Trent.And our indentures tripartite are drawn;Which being sealed interchangeably,A business that this night may execute,To-morrow, cousin Percy, you and IAnd my good Lord of Worcester will set forthTo meet your father and the Scottish power,As is appointed us, at Shrewsbury.My father Glendower is not ready yet,Not shall we need his help these fourteen days.Within that space you may have drawn togetherYour tenants, friends and neighbouring gentlemen.GLENDOWERA shorter time shall send me to you, lords:And in my conduct shall your ladies come;From whom you now must steal and take no leave,For there will be a world of water shedUpon the parting of your wives and you.HOTSPURMethinks my moiety, north from Burton here,In quantity equals not one of yours:See how this river comes me cranking in,And cuts me from the best of all my landA huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle out.I'll have the current in this place damm'd up;And here the smug and silver Trent shall runIn a new channel, fair and evenly;It shall not wind with such a deep indent,To rob me of so rich a bottom here.GLENDOWERNot wind? it shall, it must; you see it doth.MORTIMERYea, butMark how he bears his course, and runs me upWith like advantage on the other side;Gelding the opposed continent as muchAs on the other side it takes from you.EARL OF WORCESTERYea, but a little charge will trench him hereAnd on this north side win this cape of land;And then he runs straight and even.HOTSPURI'll have it so: a little charge will do it.GLENDOWERI'll not have it alter'd.HOTSPURWill not you?GLENDOWERNo, nor you shall not.HOTSPURWho shall say me nay?GLENDOWERWhy, that will I.HOTSPURLet me not understand you, then; speak it in Welsh.GLENDOWERI can speak English, lord, as well as you;For I was train'd up in the English court;Where, being but young, I framed to the harpMany an English ditty lovely wellAnd gave the tongue a helpful ornament,A virtue that was never seen in you.HOTSPURMarry,And I am glad of it with all my heart:I had rather be a kitten and cry mewThan one of these same metre ballad-mongers;I had rather hear a brazen canstick turn'd,Or a dry wheel grate on the axle-tree;And that would set my teeth nothing on edge,Nothing so much as mincing poetry:'Tis like the forced gait of a shuffling nag.GLENDOWERCome, you shall have Trent turn'd.HOTSPURI do not care: I'll give thrice so much landTo any well-deserving friend;But in the way of bargain, mark ye me,I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair.Are the indentures drawn? shall we be gone?GLENDOWERThe moon shines fair; you may away by night:I'll haste the writer and withalBreak with your wives of your departure hence:I am afraid my daughter will run mad,So much she doteth on her Mortimer.Exit GLENDOWERMORTIMERFie, cousin Percy! how you cross my father!HOTSPURI cannot choose: sometime he angers meWith telling me of the mouldwarp and the ant,Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies,And of a dragon and a finless fish,A clip-wing'd griffin and a moulten raven,A couching lion and a ramping cat,And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuffAs puts me from my faith. I tell you what;He held me last night at least nine hoursIn reckoning up the several devils' namesThat were his lackeys: I cried 'hum,' and 'well, go to,'But mark'd him not a word. O, he is as tediousAs a tired horse, a railing wife;Worse than a smoky house: I had rather liveWith cheese and garlic in a windmill, far,Than feed on cates and have him talk to meIn any summer-house in Christendom.MORTIMERIn faith, he is a worthy gentleman,Exceedingly well read, and profitedIn strange concealments, valiant as a lionAnd as wondrous affable and as bountifulAs mines of India. Shall I tell you, cousin?He holds your temper in a high respectAnd curbs himself even of his natural scopeWhen you come 'cross his humour; faith, he does:I warrant you, that man is not aliveMight so have tempted him as you have done,Without the taste of danger and reproof:But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.EARL OF WORCESTERIn faith, my lord, you are too wilful-blame;And since your coming hither have done enoughTo put him quite beside his patience.You must needs learn, lord, to amend this fault:Though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood,--And that's the dearest grace it renders you,--Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage,Defect of manners, want of government,Pride, haughtiness, opinion and disdain:The least of which haunting a noblemanLoseth men's hearts and leaves behind a stainUpon the beauty of all parts besides,Beguiling them of commendation.HOTSPURWell, I am school'd: good manners be your speed!Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.Re-enter GLENDOWER with the ladiesMORTIMERThis is the deadly spite that angers me;My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.GLENDOWERMy daughter weeps: she will not part with you;She'll be a soldier too, she'll to the wars.MORTIMERGood father, tell her that she and my aunt PercyShall follow in your conduct speedily.Glendower speaks to her in Welsh, and she answers him in the sameGLENDOWERShe is desperate here; a peevish self-wind harlotry,one that no persuasion can do good upon.The lady speaks in WelshMORTIMERI understand thy looks: that pretty WelshWhich thou pour'st down from these swelling heavensI am too perfect in; and, but for shame,In such a parley should I answer thee.The lady speaks again in WelshI understand thy kisses and thou mine,And that's a feeling disputation:But I will never be a truant, love,Till I have learned thy language; for thy tongueMakes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penn'd,Sung by a fair queen in a summer's bower,With ravishing division, to her lute.GLENDOWERNay, if you melt, then will she run mad.The lady speaks again in WelshMORTIMERO, I am ignorance itself in this!GLENDOWERShe bids you on the wanton rushes lay you downAnd rest your gentle head upon her lap,And she will sing the song that pleaseth youAnd on your eyelids crown the god of sleep.Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,Making such difference 'twixt wake and sleepAs is the difference betwixt day and nightThe hour before the heavenly-harness'd teamBegins his golden progress in the east.MORTIMERWith all my heart I'll sit and hear her sing:By that time will our book, I think, be drawnGLENDOWERDo so;And those musicians that shall play to youHang in the air a thousand leagues from hence,And straight they shall be here: sit, and attend.HOTSPURCome, Kate, thou art perfect in lying down: come,quick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy lap.LADY PERCYGo, ye giddy goose.The music playsHOTSPURNow I perceive the devil understands Welsh;And 'tis no marvel he is so humorous.By'r lady, he is a good musician.LADY PERCYThen should you be nothing but musical for you arealtogether governed by humours. Lie still, ye thief,and hear the lady sing in Welsh.HOTSPURI had rather hear Lady, my brach, howl in Irish.LADY PERCYWouldst thou have thy head broken?HOTSPURNo.LADY PERCYThen be still.HOTSPURNeither;'tis a woman's fault.LADY PERCYNow God help thee!HOTSPURTo the Welsh lady's bed.LADY PERCYWhat's that?HOTSPURPeace! she sings.Here the lady sings a Welsh songHOTSPURCome, Kate, I'll have your song too.LADY PERCYNot mine, in good sooth.HOTSPURNot yours, in good sooth! Heart! you swear like acomfit-maker's wife. 'Not you, in good sooth,' and'as true as I live,' and 'as God shall mend me,' and'as sure as day,'And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths,As if thou never walk'st further than Finsbury.Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art,A good mouth-filling oath, and leave 'in sooth,'And such protest of pepper-gingerbread,To velvet-guards and Sunday-citizens.Come, sing.LADY PERCYI will not sing.HOTSPUR'Tis the next way to turn tailor, or be red-breastteacher. An the indentures be drawn, I'll awaywithin these two hours; and so, come in when ye will.ExitGLENDOWERCome, come, Lord Mortimer; you are as slowAs hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.By this our book is drawn; we'll but seal,And then to horse immediately.MORTIMERWith all my heart.ExeuntSCENE II. London. The palace.Enter KING HENRY IV, PRINCE HENRY, and othersKING HENRY IVLords, give us leave; the Prince of Wales and IMust have some private conference; but be near at hand,For we shall presently have need of you.Exeunt LordsI know not whether God will have it so,For some displeasing service I have done,That, in his secret doom, out of my bloodHe'll breed revengement and a scourge for me;But thou dost in thy passages of lifeMake me believe that thou art only mark'dFor the hot vengeance and the rod of heavenTo punish my mistreadings. Tell me else,Could such inordinate and low desires,Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,Such barren pleasures, rude society,As thou art match'd withal and grafted to,Accompany the greatness of thy bloodAnd hold their level with thy princely heart?PRINCE HENRYSo please your majesty, I would I couldQuit all offences with as clear excuseAs well as I am doubtless I can purgeMyself of many I am charged withal:Yet such extenuation let me beg,As, in reproof of many tales devised,which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear,By smiling pick-thanks and base news-mongers,I may, for some things true, wherein my youthHath faulty wander'd and irregular,Find pardon on my true submission.KING HENRY IVGod pardon thee! yet let me wonder, Harry,At thy affections, which do hold a wingQuite from the flight of all thy ancestors.Thy place in council thou hast rudely lost.Which by thy younger brother is supplied,And art almost an alien to the heartsOf all the court and princes of my blood:The hope and expectation of thy timeIs ruin'd, and the soul of every manProphetically doth forethink thy fall.Had I so lavish of my presence been,So common-hackney'd in the eyes of men,So stale and cheap to vulgar company,Opinion, that did help me to the crown,Had still kept loyal to possessionAnd left me in reputeless banishment,A fellow of no mark nor likelihood.By being seldom seen, I could not stirBut like a comet I was wonder'd at;That men would tell their children 'This is he;'Others would say 'Where, which is Bolingbroke?'And then I stole all courtesy from heaven,And dress'd myself in such humilityThat I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts,Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths,Even in the presence of the crowned king.Thus did I keep my person fresh and new;My presence, like a robe pontifical,Ne'er seen but wonder'd at: and so my state,Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a feastAnd won by rareness such solemnity.The skipping king, he ambled up and downWith shallow jesters and rash bavin wits,Soon kindled and soon burnt; carded his state,Mingled his royalty with capering fools,Had his great name profaned with their scornsAnd gave his countenance, against his name,To laugh at gibing boys and stand the pushOf every beardless vain comparative,Grew a companion to the common streets,Enfeoff'd himself to popularity;That, being daily swallow'd by men's eyes,They surfeited with honey and beganTo loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a littleMore than a little is by much too much.So when he had occasion to be seen,He was but as the cuckoo is in June,Heard, not regarded; seen, but with such eyesAs, sick and blunted with community,Afford no extraordinary gaze,Such as is bent on sun-like majestyWhen it shines seldom in admiring eyes;But rather drowzed and hung their eyelids down,Slept in his face and render'd such aspectAs cloudy men use to their adversaries,Being with his presence glutted, gorged and full.And in that very line, Harry, standest thou;For thou has lost thy princely privilegeWith vile participation: not an eyeBut is a-weary of thy common sight,Save mine, which hath desired to see thee more;Which now doth that I would not have it do,Make blind itself with foolish tenderness.PRINCE HENRYI shall hereafter, my thrice gracious lord,Be more myself.KING HENRY IVFor all the worldAs thou art to this hour was Richard thenWhen I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh,And even as I was then is Percy now.Now, by my sceptre and my soul to boot,He hath more worthy interest to the stateThan thou the shadow of succession;For of no right, nor colour like to right,He doth fill fields with harness in the realm,Turns head against the lion's armed jaws,And, being no more in debt to years than thou,Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops onTo bloody battles and to bruising arms.What never-dying honour hath he gotAgainst renowned Douglas! whose high deeds,Whose hot incursions and great name in armsHolds from all soldiers chief majorityAnd military title capitalThrough all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ:Thrice hath this Hotspur, Mars in swathling clothes,This infant warrior, in his enterprisesDiscomfited great Douglas, ta'en him once,Enlarged him and made a friend of him,To fill the mouth of deep defiance upAnd shake the peace and safety of our throne.And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland,The Archbishop's grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer,Capitulate against us and are up.But wherefore do I tell these news to thee?Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes,Which art my near'st and dearest enemy?Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear,Base inclination and the start of spleenTo fight against me under Percy's pay,To dog his heels and curtsy at his frowns,To show how much thou art degenerate.PRINCE HENRYDo not think so; you shall not find it so:And God forgive them that so much have sway'dYour majesty's good thoughts away from me!I will redeem all this on Percy's headAnd in the closing of some glorious dayBe bold to tell you that I am your son;When I will wear a garment all of bloodAnd stain my favours in a bloody mask,Which, wash'd away, shall scour my shame with it:And that shall be the day, whene'er it lights,That this same child of honour and renown,This gallant Hotspur, this all-praised knight,And your unthought-of Harry chance to meet.For every honour sitting on his helm,Would they were multitudes, and on my headMy shames redoubled! for the time will come,That I shall make this northern youth exchangeHis glorious deeds for my indignities.Percy is but my factor, good my lord,To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf;And I will call him to so strict account,That he shall render every glory up,Yea, even the slightest worship of his time,Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.This, in the name of God, I promise here:The which if He be pleased I shall perform,I do beseech your majesty may salveThe long-grown wounds of my intemperance:If not, the end of life cancels all bands;And I will die a hundred thousand deathsEre break the smallest parcel of this vow.KING HENRY IVA hundred thousand rebels die in this:Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.Enter BLUNTHow now, good Blunt? thy looks are full of speed.SIR WALTER BLUNTSo hath the business that I come to speak of.Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent wordThat Douglas and the English rebels metThe eleventh of this month at ShrewsburyA mighty and a fearful head they are,If promises be kept on every hand,As ever offer'd foul play in the state.KING HENRY IVThe Earl of Westmoreland set forth to-day;With him my son, Lord John of Lancaster;For this advertisement is five days old:On Wednesday next, Harry, you shall set forward;On Thursday we ourselves will march: our meetingIs Bridgenorth: and, Harry, you shall marchThrough Gloucestershire; by which account,Our business valued, some twelve days henceOur general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet.Our hands are full of business: let's away;Advantage feeds him fat, while men delay.ExeuntScene IIIEastcheap. The Boar's-Head Tavern.Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPHFALSTAFFBardolph, am I not fallen away vilely since this lastaction? do I not bate? do I not dwindle? Why myskin hangs about me like an like an old lady's loosegown; I am withered like an old apple-john. Well,I'll repent, and that suddenly, while I am in someliking; I shall be out of heart shortly, and then Ishall have no strength to repent. An I have notforgotten what the inside of a church is made of, Iam a peppercorn, a brewer's horse: the inside of achurch! Company, villanous company, hath been thespoil of me.BARDOLPHSir John, you are so fretful, you cannot live long.FALSTAFFWhy, there is it: come sing me a bawdy song; makeme merry. I was as virtuously given as a gentlemanneed to be; virtuous enough; swore little; diced notabove seven times a week; went to a bawdy-house oncein a quarter--of an hour; paid money that Iborrowed, three of four times; lived well and ingood compass: and now I live out of all order, outof all compass.BARDOLPHWhy, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must needsbe out of all compass, out of all reasonablecompass, Sir John.FALSTAFFDo thou amend thy face, and I'll amend my life:thou art our admiral, thou bearest the lantern inthe poop, but 'tis in the nose of thee; thou art theKnight of the Burning Lamp.BARDOLPHWhy, Sir John, my face does you no harm.FALSTAFFNo, I'll be sworn; I make as good use of it as manya man doth of a Death's-head or a memento mori: Inever see thy face but I think upon hell-fire andDives that lived in purple; for there he is in hisrobes, burning, burning. If thou wert any waygiven to virtue, I would swear by thy face; my oathshould be 'By this fire, that's God's angel:' butthou art altogether given over; and wert indeed, butfor the light in thy face, the son of utterdarkness. When thou rannest up Gadshill in thenight to catch my horse, if I did not think thouhadst been an ignis fatuus or a ball of wildfire,there's no purchase in money. O, thou art aperpetual triumph, an everlasting bonfire-light!Thou hast saved me a thousand marks in links andtorches, walking with thee in the night betwixttavern and tavern: but the sack that thou hastdrunk me would have bought me lights as good cheapat the dearest chandler's in Europe. I havemaintained that salamander of yours with fire anytime this two and thirty years; God reward me forit!BARDOLPH'Sblood, I would my face were in your belly!FALSTAFFGod-a-mercy! so should I be sure to be heart-burned.Enter HostessHow now, Dame Partlet the hen! have you inquiredyet who picked my pocket?HostessWhy, Sir John, what do you think, Sir John? do youthink I keep thieves in my house? I have searched,I have inquired, so has my husband, man by man, boyby boy, servant by servant: the tithe of a hairwas never lost in my house before.FALSTAFFYe lie, hostess: Bardolph was shaved and lost manya hair; and I'll be sworn my pocket was picked. Goto, you are a woman, go.HostessWho, I? no; I defy thee: God's light, I was nevercalled so in mine own house before.FALSTAFFGo to, I know you well enough.HostessNo, Sir John; You do not know me, Sir John. I knowyou, Sir John: you owe me money, Sir John; and nowyou pick a quarrel to beguile me of it: I boughtyou a dozen of shirts to your back.FALSTAFFDowlas, filthy dowlas: I have given them away tobakers' wives, and they have made bolters of them.HostessNow, as I am a true woman, holland of eightshillings an ell. You owe money here besides, SirJohn, for your diet and by-drinkings, and money lentyou, four and twenty pound.FALSTAFFHe had his part of it; let him pay.HostessHe? alas, he is poor; he hath nothing.FALSTAFFHow! poor? look upon his face; what call you rich?let them coin his nose, let them coin his cheeks:Ill not pay a denier. What, will you make a younkerof me? shall I not take mine case in mine inn but Ishall have my pocket picked? I have lost aseal-ring of my grandfather's worth forty mark.HostessO Jesu, I have heard the prince tell him, I know nothow oft, that ring was copper!FALSTAFFHow! the prince is a Jack, a sneak-cup: 'sblood, anhe were here, I would cudgel him like a dog, if hewould say so.Enter PRINCE HENRY and PETO, marching, and FALSTAFF meets them playing on his truncheon like a lifeHow now, lad! is the wind in that door, i' faith?must we all march?BARDOLPHYea, two and two, Newgate fashion.HostessMy lord, I pray you, hear me.PRINCE HENRYWhat sayest thou, Mistress Quickly? How doth thyhusband? I love him well; he is an honest man.HostessGood my lord, hear me.FALSTAFFPrithee, let her alone, and list to me.PRINCE HENRYWhat sayest thou, Jack?FALSTAFFThe other night I fell asleep here behind the arrasand had my pocket picked: this house is turnedbawdy-house; they pick pockets.PRINCE HENRYWhat didst thou lose, Jack?FALSTAFFWilt thou believe me, Hal? three or four bonds offorty pound apiece, and a seal-ring of mygrandfather's.PRINCE HENRYA trifle, some eight-penny matter.HostessSo I told him, my lord; and I said I heard yourgrace say so: and, my lord, he speaks most vilelyof you, like a foul-mouthed man as he is; and saidhe would cudgel you.PRINCE HENRYWhat! he did not?HostessThere's neither faith, truth, nor womanhood in me else.FALSTAFFThere's no more faith in thee than in a stewedprune; nor no more truth in thee than in a drawnfox; and for womanhood, Maid Marian may be thedeputy's wife of the ward to thee. Go, you thing,goHostessSay, what thing? what thing?FALSTAFFWhat thing! why, a thing to thank God on.HostessI am no thing to thank God on, I would thoushouldst know it; I am an honest man's wife: and,setting thy knighthood aside, thou art a knave tocall me so.FALSTAFFSetting thy womanhood aside, thou art a beast to sayotherwise.HostessSay, what beast, thou knave, thou?FALSTAFFWhat beast! why, an otter.PRINCE HENRYAn otter, Sir John! Why an otter?FALSTAFFWhy, she's neither fish nor flesh; a man knows notwhere to have her.HostessThou art an unjust man in saying so: thou or anyman knows where to have me, thou knave, thou!PRINCE HENRYThou sayest true, hostess; and he slanders thee most grossly.HostessSo he doth you, my lord; and said this other day youought him a thousand pound.PRINCE HENRYSirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound?FALSTAFFA thousand pound, Ha! a million: thy love is wortha million: thou owest me thy love.HostessNay, my lord, he called you Jack, and said he wouldcudgel you.FALSTAFFDid I, Bardolph?BARDOLPHIndeed, Sir John, you said so.FALSTAFFYea, if he said my ring was copper.PRINCE HENRYI say 'tis copper: darest thou be as good as thy word now?FALSTAFFWhy, Hal, thou knowest, as thou art but man, I dare:but as thou art prince, I fear thee as I fear theroaring of a lion's whelp.PRINCE HENRYAnd why not as the lion?FALSTAFFThe king is to be feared as the lion: dost thouthink I'll fear thee as I fear thy father? nay, anI do, I pray God my girdle break.PRINCE HENRYO, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thyknees! But, sirrah, there's no room for faith,truth, nor honesty in this bosom of thine; it is allfilled up with guts and midriff. Charge an honestwoman with picking thy pocket! why, thou whoreson,impudent, embossed rascal, if there were anything inthy pocket but tavern-reckonings, memorandums ofbawdy-houses, and one poor penny-worth ofsugar-candy to make thee long-winded, if thy pocketwere enriched with any other injuries but these, Iam a villain: and yet you will stand to if; you willnot pocket up wrong: art thou not ashamed?FALSTAFFDost thou hear, Hal? thou knowest in the state ofinnocency Adam fell; and what should poor JackFalstaff do in the days of villany? Thou seest Ihave more flesh than another man, and therefore morefrailty. You confess then, you picked my pocket?PRINCE HENRYIt appears so by the story.FALSTAFFHostess, I forgive thee: go, make ready breakfast;love thy husband, look to thy servants, cherish thyguests: thou shalt find me tractable to any honestreason: thou seest I am pacified still. Nay,prithee, be gone.Exit HostessNow Hal, to the news at court: for the robbery,lad, how is that answered?PRINCE HENRYO, my sweet beef, I must still be good angel tothee: the money is paid back again.FALSTAFFO, I do not like that paying back; 'tis a double labour.PRINCE HENRYI am good friends with my father and may do any thing.FALSTAFFRob me the exchequer the first thing thou doest, anddo it with unwashed hands too.BARDOLPHDo, my lord.PRINCE HENRYI have procured thee, Jack, a charge of foot.FALSTAFFI would it had been of horse. Where shall I findone that can steal well? O for a fine thief, of theage of two and twenty or thereabouts! I amheinously unprovided. Well, God be thanked forthese rebels, they offend none but the virtuous: Ilaud them, I praise them.PRINCE HENRYBardolph!BARDOLPHMy lord?PRINCE HENRYGo bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster, to mybrother John; this to my Lord of Westmoreland.Exit BardolphGo, Peto, to horse, to horse; for thou and I havethirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time.Exit PetoJack, meet me to-morrow in the temple hall at twoo'clock in the afternoon.There shalt thou know thy charge; and there receiveMoney and order for their furniture.The land is burning; Percy stands on high;And either we or they must lower lie.Exit PRINCE HENRYFALSTAFFRare words! brave world! Hostess, my breakfast, come!O, I could wish this tavern were my drum!ExitACT IVSCENE I. The rebel camp near Shrewsbury.Enter HOTSPUR, WORCESTER, and DOUGLASHOTSPURWell said, my noble Scot: if speaking truthIn this fine age were not thought flattery,Such attribution should the Douglas have,As not a soldier of this season's stampShould go so general current through the world.By God, I cannot flatter; I do defyThe tongues of soothers; but a braver placeIn my heart's love hath no man than yourself:Nay, task me to my word; approve me, lord.EARL OF DOUGLASThou art the king of honour:No man so potent breathes upon the groundBut I will beard him.HOTSPURDo so, and 'tis well.Enter a Messenger with lettersWhat letters hast thou there?--I can but thank you.MessengerThese letters come from your father.HOTSPURLetters from him! why comes he not himself?MessengerHe cannot come, my lord; he is grievous sick.HOTSPUR'Zounds! how has he the leisure to be sickIn such a rustling time? Who leads his power?Under whose government come they along?MessengerHis letters bear his mind, not I, my lord.EARL OF WORCESTERI prithee, tell me, doth he keep his bed?MessengerHe did, my lord, four days ere I set forth;And at the time of my departure thenceHe was much fear'd by his physicians.EARL OF WORCESTERI would the state of time had first been wholeEre he by sickness had been visited:His health was never better worth than now.HOTSPURSick now! droop now! this sickness doth infectThe very life-blood of our enterprise;'Tis catching hither, even to our camp.He writes me here, that inward sickness--And that his friends by deputation could notSo soon be drawn, nor did he think it meetTo lay so dangerous and dear a trustOn any soul removed but on his own.Yet doth he give us bold advertisement,That with our small conjunction we should on,To see how fortune is disposed to us;For, as he writes, there is no quailing now.Because the king is certainly possess'dOf all our purposes. What say you to it?EARL OF WORCESTERYour father's sickness is a maim to us.HOTSPURA perilous gash, a very limb lopp'd off:And yet, in faith, it is not; his present wantSeems more than we shall find it: were it goodTo set the exact wealth of all our statesAll at one cast? to set so rich a mainOn the nice hazard of one doubtful hour?It were not good; for therein should we readThe very bottom and the soul of hope,The very list, the very utmost boundOf all our fortunes.EARL OF DOUGLAS'Faith, and so we should;Where now remains a sweet reversion:We may boldly spend upon the hope of whatIs to come in:A comfort of retirement lives in this.HOTSPURA rendezvous, a home to fly unto.If that the devil and mischance look bigUpon the maidenhead of our affairs.EARL OF WORCESTERBut yet I would your father had been here.The quality and hair of our attemptBrooks no division: it will be thoughtBy some, that know not why he is away,That wisdom, loyalty and mere dislikeOf our proceedings kept the earl from hence:And think how such an apprehensionMay turn the tide of fearful factionAnd breed a kind of question in our cause;For well you know we of the offering sideMust keep aloof from strict arbitrement,And stop all sight-holes, every loop from whenceThe eye of reason may pry in upon us:This absence of your father's draws a curtain,That shows the ignorant a kind of fearBefore not dreamt of.HOTSPURYou strain too far.I rather of his absence make this use:It lends a lustre and more great opinion,A larger dare to our great enterprise,Than if the earl were here; for men must think,If we without his help can make a headTo push against a kingdom, with his helpWe shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down.Yet all goes well, yet all our joints are whole.EARL OF DOUGLASAs heart can think: there is not such a wordSpoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.Enter SIR RICHARD VERNONHOTSPURMy cousin Vernon, welcome, by my soul.VERNONPray God my news be worth a welcome, lord.The Earl of Westmoreland, seven thousand strong,Is marching hitherwards; with him Prince John.HOTSPURNo harm: what more?VERNONAnd further, I have learn'd,The king himself in person is set forth,Or hitherwards intended speedily,With strong and mighty preparation.HOTSPURHe shall be welcome too. Where is his son,The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales,And his comrades, that daff'd the world aside,And bid it pass?VERNONAll furnish'd, all in arms;All plumed like estridges that with the windBaited like eagles having lately bathed;Glittering in golden coats, like images;As full of spirit as the month of May,And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer;Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls.I saw young Harry, with his beaver on,His cuisses on his thighs, gallantly arm'dRise from the ground like feather'd Mercury,And vaulted with such ease into his seat,As if an angel dropp'd down from the clouds,To turn and wind a fiery PegasusAnd witch the world with noble horsemanship.HOTSPURNo more, no more: worse than the sun in March,This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come:They come like sacrifices in their trim,And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky warAll hot and bleeding will we offer them:The mailed Mars shall on his altar sitUp to the ears in blood. I am on fireTo hear this rich reprisal is so nighAnd yet not ours. Come, let me taste my horse,Who is to bear me like a thunderboltAgainst the bosom of the Prince of Wales:Harry to Harry shall, hot horse to horse,Meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse.O that Glendower were come!VERNONThere is more news:I learn'd in Worcester, as I rode along,He cannot draw his power this fourteen days.EARL OF DOUGLASThat's the worst tidings that I hear of yet.WORCESTERAy, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.HOTSPURWhat may the king's whole battle reach unto?VERNONTo thirty thousand.HOTSPURForty let it be:My father and Glendower being both away,The powers of us may serve so great a dayCome, let us take a muster speedily:Doomsday is near; die all, die merrily.EARL OF DOUGLASTalk not of dying: I am out of fearOf death or death's hand for this one-half year.ExeuntSCENE II. A public road near Coventry.Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPHFALSTAFFBardolph, get thee before to Coventry; fill me abottle of sack: our soldiers shall march through;we'll to Sutton Co'fil' tonight.BARDOLPHWill you give me money, captain?FALSTAFFLay out, lay out.BARDOLPHThis bottle makes an angel.FALSTAFFAn if it do, take it for thy labour; and if it maketwenty, take them all; I'll answer the coinage. Bidmy lieutenant Peto meet me at town's end.BARDOLPHI will, captain: farewell.ExitFALSTAFFIf I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a sousedgurnet. I have misused the king's press damnably.I have got, in exchange of a hundred and fiftysoldiers, three hundred and odd pounds. I press menone but good house-holders, yeoman's sons; inquireme out contracted bachelors, such as had been askedtwice on the banns; such a commodity of warm slaves,as had as lieve hear the devil as a drum; such asfear the report of a caliver worse than a struckfowl or a hurt wild-duck. I pressed me none but suchtoasts-and-butter, with hearts in their bellies nobigger than pins' heads, and they have bought outtheir services; and now my whole charge consists ofancients, corporals, lieutenants, gentlemen ofcompanies, slaves as ragged as Lazarus in thepainted cloth, where the glutton's dogs licked hissores; and such as indeed were never soldiers, butdiscarded unjust serving-men, younger sons toyounger brothers, revolted tapsters and ostlerstrade-fallen, the cankers of a calm world and along peace, ten times more dishonourable ragged thanan old faced ancient: and such have I, to fill upthe rooms of them that have bought out theirservices, that you would think that I had a hundredand fifty tattered prodigals lately come fromswine-keeping, from eating draff and husks. A madfellow met me on the way and told me I had unloadedall the gibbets and pressed the dead bodies. No eyehath seen such scarecrows. I'll not march throughCoventry with them, that's flat: nay, and thevillains march wide betwixt the legs, as if they hadgyves on; for indeed I had the most of them out ofprison. There's but a shirt and a half in all mycompany; and the half shirt is two napkins tackedtogether and thrown over the shoulders like anherald's coat without sleeves; and the shirt, to saythe truth, stolen from my host at Saint Alban's, orthe red-nose innkeeper of Daventry. But that's allone; they'll find linen enough on every hedge.Enter the PRINCE and WESTMORELANDPRINCE HENRYHow now, blown Jack! how now, quilt!FALSTAFFWhat, Hal! how now, mad wag! what a devil dost thouin Warwickshire? My good Lord of Westmoreland, Icry you mercy: I thought your honour had already beenat Shrewsbury.WESTMORELANDFaith, Sir John,'tis more than time that I werethere, and you too; but my powers are there already.The king, I can tell you, looks for us all: we mustaway all night.FALSTAFFTut, never fear me: I am as vigilant as a cat tosteal cream.PRINCE HENRYI think, to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hathalready made thee butter. But tell me, Jack, whosefellows are these that come after?FALSTAFFMine, Hal, mine.PRINCE HENRYI did never see such pitiful rascals.FALSTAFFTut, tut; good enough to toss; food for powder, foodfor powder; they'll fill a pit as well as better:tush, man, mortal men, mortal men.WESTMORELANDAy, but, Sir John, methinks they are exceeding poorand bare, too beggarly.FALSTAFF'Faith, for their poverty, I know not where they hadthat; and for their bareness, I am sure they neverlearned that of me.PRINCE HENRYNo I'll be sworn; unless you call three fingers onthe ribs bare. But, sirrah, make haste: Percy isalready in the field.FALSTAFFWhat, is the king encamped?WESTMORELANDHe is, Sir John: I fear we shall stay too long.FALSTAFFWell,To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feastFits a dull fighter and a keen guest.ExeuntSCENE III. The rebel camp near Shrewsbury.Enter HOTSPUR, WORCESTER, DOUGLAS, and VERNONHOTSPURWe'll fight with him to-night.EARL OF WORCESTERIt may not be.EARL OF DOUGLASYou give him then the advantage.VERNONNot a whit.HOTSPURWhy say you so? looks he not for supply?VERNONSo do we.HOTSPURHis is certain, ours is doubtful.EARL OF WORCESTERGood cousin, be advised; stir not tonight.VERNONDo not, my lord.EARL OF DOUGLASYou do not counsel well:You speak it out of fear and cold heart.VERNONDo me no slander, Douglas: by my life,And I dare well maintain it with my life,If well-respected honour bid me on,I hold as little counsel with weak fearAs you, my lord, or any Scot that this day lives:Let it be seen to-morrow in the battleWhich of us fears.EARL OF DOUGLASYea, or to-night.VERNONContent.HOTSPURTo-night, say I.VERNONCome, come it nay not be. I wonder much,Being men of such great leading as you are,That you foresee not what impedimentsDrag back our expedition: certain horseOf my cousin Vernon's are not yet come up:Your uncle Worcester's horse came but today;And now their pride and mettle is asleep,Their courage with hard labour tame and dull,That not a horse is half the half of himself.HOTSPURSo are the horses of the enemyIn general, journey-bated and brought low:The better part of ours are full of rest.EARL OF WORCESTERThe number of the king exceedeth ours:For God's sake. cousin, stay till all come in.The trumpet sounds a parleyEnter SIR WALTER BLUNTSIR WALTER BLUNTI come with gracious offers from the king,if you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.HOTSPURWelcome, Sir Walter Blunt; and would to GodYou were of our determination!Some of us love you well; and even those someEnvy your great deservings and good name,Because you are not of our quality,But stand against us like an enemy.SIR WALTER BLUNTAnd God defend but still I should stand so,So long as out of limit and true ruleYou stand against anointed majesty.But to my charge. The king hath sent to knowThe nature of your griefs, and whereuponYou conjure from the breast of civil peaceSuch bold hostility, teaching his duteous landAudacious cruelty. If that the kingHave any way your good deserts forgot,Which he confesseth to be manifold,He bids you name your griefs; and with all speedYou shall have your desires with interestAnd pardon absolute for yourself and theseHerein misled by your suggestion.HOTSPURThe king is kind; and well we know the kingKnows at what time to promise, when to pay.My father and my uncle and myselfDid give him that same royalty he wears;And when he was not six and twenty strong,Sick in the world's regard, wretched and low,A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home,My father gave him welcome to the shore;And when he heard him swear and vow to GodHe came but to be Duke of Lancaster,To sue his livery and beg his peace,With tears of innocency and terms of zeal,My father, in kind heart and pity moved,Swore him assistance and perform'd it too.Now when the lords and barons of the realmPerceived Northumberland did lean to him,The more and less came in with cap and knee;Met him in boroughs, cities, villages,Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,Laid gifts before him, proffer'd him their oaths,Gave him their heirs, as pages follow'd himEven at the heels in golden multitudes.He presently, as greatness knows itself,Steps me a little higher than his vowMade to my father, while his blood was poor,Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh;And now, forsooth, takes on him to reformSome certain edicts and some strait decreesThat lie too heavy on the commonwealth,Cries out upon abuses, seems to weepOver his country's wrongs; and by this face,This seeming brow of justice, did he winThe hearts of all that he did angle for;Proceeded further; cut me off the headsOf all the favourites that the absent kingIn deputation left behind him here,When he was personal in the Irish war.SIR WALTER BLUNTTut, I came not to hear this.HOTSPURThen to the point.In short time after, he deposed the king;Soon after that, deprived him of his life;And in the neck of that, task'd the whole state:To make that worse, suffer'd his kinsman March,Who is, if every owner were well placed,Indeed his king, to be engaged in Wales,There without ransom to lie forfeited;Disgraced me in my happy victories,Sought to entrap me by intelligence;Rated mine uncle from the council-board;In rage dismiss'd my father from the court;Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong,And in conclusion drove us to seek outThis head of safety; and withal to pryInto his title, the which we findToo indirect for long continuance.SIR WALTER BLUNTShall I return this answer to the king?HOTSPURNot so, Sir Walter: we'll withdraw awhile.Go to the king; and let there be impawn'dSome surety for a safe return again,And in the morning early shall my uncleBring him our purposes: and so farewell.SIR WALTER BLUNTI would you would accept of grace and love.HOTSPURAnd may be so we shall.SIR WALTER BLUNTPray God you do.ExeuntSCENE IV. York. The ARCHBISHOP'S palace.Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF YORK and SIR MICHAELARCHBISHOP OF YORKHie, good Sir Michael; bear this sealed briefWith winged haste to the lord marshal;This to my cousin Scroop, and all the restTo whom they are directed. If you knewHow much they do to import, you would make haste.SIR MICHAELMy good lord,I guess their tenor.ARCHBISHOP OF YORKLike enough you do.To-morrow, good Sir Michael, is a dayWherein the fortune of ten thousand menMust bide the touch; for, sir, at Shrewsbury,As I am truly given to understand,The king with mighty and quick-raised powerMeets with Lord Harry: and, I fear, Sir Michael,What with the sickness of Northumberland,Whose power was in the first proportion,And what with Owen Glendower's absence thence,Who with them was a rated sinew tooAnd comes not in, o'er-ruled by prophecies,I fear the power of Percy is too weakTo wage an instant trial with the king.SIR MICHAELWhy, my good lord, you need not fear;There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.ARCHBISHOP OF YORKNo, Mortimer is not there.SIR MICHAELBut there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,And there is my Lord of Worcester and a headOf gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.ARCHBISHOP OF YORKAnd so there is: but yet the king hath drawnThe special head of all the land together:The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,The noble Westmoreland and warlike Blunt;And moe corrivals and dear menOf estimation and command in arms.SIR MICHAELDoubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed.ARCHBISHOP OF YORKI hope no less, yet needful 'tis to fear;And, to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed:For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the kingDismiss his power, he means to visit us,For he hath heard of our confederacy,And 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him:Therefore make haste. I must go write againTo other friends; and so farewell, Sir Michael.ExeuntACT VSCENE I. KING HENRY IV's camp near Shrewsbury.Enter KING HENRY, PRINCE HENRY, Lord John of  LANCASTER, EARL OF WESTMORELAND, SIR WALTER BLUNT, and FALSTAFFKING HENRY IVHow bloodily the sun begins to peerAbove yon busky hill! the day looks paleAt his distemperature.PRINCE HENRYThe southern windDoth play the trumpet to his purposes,And by his hollow whistling in the leavesForetells a tempest and a blustering day.KING HENRY IVThen with the losers let it sympathize,For nothing can seem foul to those that win.The trumpet soundsEnter WORCESTER and VERNONHow now, my Lord of Worcester! 'tis not wellThat you and I should meet upon such termsAs now we meet. You have deceived our trust,And made us doff our easy robes of peace,To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel:This is not well, my lord, this is not well.What say you to it? will you again unknitThis curlish knot of all-abhorred war?And move in that obedient orb againWhere you did give a fair and natural light,And be no more an exhaled meteor,A prodigy of fear and a portentOf broached mischief to the unborn times?EARL OF WORCESTERHear me, my liege:For mine own part, I could be well contentTo entertain the lag-end of my lifeWith quiet hours; for I do protest,I have not sought the day of this dislike.KING HENRY IVYou have not sought it! how comes it, then?FALSTAFFRebellion lay in his way, and he found it.PRINCE HENRYPeace, chewet, peace!EARL OF WORCESTERIt pleased your majesty to turn your looksOf favour from myself and all our house;And yet I must remember you, my lord,We were the first and dearest of your friends.For you my staff of office did I breakIn Richard's time; and posted day and nightto meet you on the way, and kiss your hand,When yet you were in place and in accountNothing so strong and fortunate as I.It was myself, my brother and his son,That brought you home and boldly did outdareThe dangers of the time. You swore to us,And you did swear that oath at Doncaster,That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state;Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right,The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster:To this we swore our aid. But in short spaceIt rain'd down fortune showering on your head;And such a flood of greatness fell on you,What with our help, what with the absent king,What with the injuries of a wanton time,The seeming sufferances that you had borne,And the contrarious winds that held the kingSo long in his unlucky Irish warsThat all in England did repute him dead:And from this swarm of fair advantagesYou took occasion to be quickly woo'dTo gripe the general sway into your hand;Forget your oath to us at Doncaster;And being fed by us you used us soAs that ungentle hull, the cuckoo's bird,Useth the sparrow; did oppress our nest;Grew by our feeding to so great a bulkThat even our love durst not come near your sightFor fear of swallowing; but with nimble wingWe were enforced, for safety sake, to flyOut of sight and raise this present head;Whereby we stand opposed by such meansAs you yourself have forged against yourselfBy unkind usage, dangerous countenance,And violation of all faith and trothSworn to us in your younger enterprise.KING HENRY IVThese things indeed you have articulate,Proclaim'd at market-crosses, read in churches,To face the garment of rebellionWith some fine colour that may please the eyeOf fickle changelings and poor discontents,Which gape and rub the elbow at the newsOf hurlyburly innovation:And never yet did insurrection wantSuch water-colours to impaint his cause;Nor moody beggars, starving for a timeOf pellmell havoc and confusion.PRINCE HENRYIn both your armies there is many a soulShall pay full dearly for this encounter,If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew,The Prince of Wales doth join with all the worldIn praise of Henry Percy: by my hopes,This present enterprise set off his head,I do not think a braver gentleman,More active-valiant or more valiant-young,More daring or more bold, is now aliveTo grace this latter age with noble deeds.For my part, I may speak it to my shame,I have a truant been to chivalry;And so I hear he doth account me too;Yet this before my father's majesty--I am content that he shall take the oddsOf his great name and estimation,And will, to save the blood on either side,Try fortune with him in a single fight.KING HENRY IVAnd, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,Albeit considerations infiniteDo make against it. No, good Worcester, no,We love our people well; even those we loveThat are misled upon your cousin's part;And, will they take the offer of our grace,Both he and they and you, every manShall be my friend again and I'll be his:So tell your cousin, and bring me wordWhat he will do: but if he will not yield,Rebuke and dread correction wait on usAnd they shall do their office. So, be gone;We will not now be troubled with reply:We offer fair; take it advisedly.Exeunt WORCESTER and VERNONPRINCE HENRYIt will not be accepted, on my life:The Douglas and the Hotspur both togetherAre confident against the world in arms.KING HENRY IVHence, therefore, every leader to his charge;For, on their answer, will we set on them:And God befriend us, as our cause is just!Exeunt all but PRINCE HENRY and FALSTAFFFALSTAFFHal, if thou see me down in the battle and bestrideme, so; 'tis a point of friendship.PRINCE HENRYNothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship.Say thy prayers, and farewell.FALSTAFFI  would 'twere bed-time, Hal, and all well.PRINCE HENRYWhy, thou owest God a death.Exit PRINCE HENRYFALSTAFF'Tis not due yet; I would be loath to pay him beforehis day. What need I be so forward with him thatcalls not on me? Well, 'tis no matter; honour pricksme on. Yea, but how if honour prick me off when Icome on? how then? Can honour set to a leg? no: oran arm? no: or take away the grief of a wound? no.Honour hath no skill in surgery, then? no. What ishonour? a word. What is in that word honour? whatis that honour? air. A trim reckoning! Who hath it?he that died o' Wednesday. Doth he feel it? no.Doth he hear it? no. 'Tis insensible, then. Yea,to the dead. But will it not live with the living?no. Why? detraction will not suffer it. ThereforeI'll none of it. Honour is a mere scutcheon: and soends my catechism.ExitSCENE II. The rebel camp.Enter WORCESTER and VERNONEARL OF WORCESTERO, no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard,The liberal and kind offer of the king.VERNON'Twere best he did.EARL OF WORCESTERThen are we all undone.It is not possible, it cannot be,The king should keep his word in loving us;He will suspect us still and find a timeTo punish this offence in other faults:Suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes;For treason is but trusted like the fox,Who, ne'er so tame, so cherish'd and lock'd up,Will have a wild trick of his ancestors.Look how we can, or sad or merrily,Interpretation will misquote our looks,And we shall feed like oxen at a stall,The better cherish'd, still the nearer death.My nephew's trespass may be well forgot;it hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood,And an adopted name of privilege,A hair-brain'd Hotspur, govern'd by a spleen:All his offences live upon my headAnd on his father's; we did train him on,And, his corruption being ta'en from us,We, as the spring of all, shall pay for all.Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know,In any case, the offer of the king.VERNONDeliver what you will; I'll say 'tis so.Here comes your cousin.Enter HOTSPUR and DOUGLASHOTSPURMy uncle is return'd:Deliver up my Lord of Westmoreland.Uncle, what news?EARL OF WORCESTERThe king will bid you battle presently.EARL OF DOUGLASDefy him by the Lord of Westmoreland.HOTSPURLord Douglas, go you and tell him so.EARL OF DOUGLASMarry, and shall, and very willingly.ExitEARL OF WORCESTERThere is no seeming mercy in the king.HOTSPURDid you beg any? God forbid!EARL OF WORCESTERI told him gently of our grievances,Of his oath-breaking; which he mended thus,By now forswearing that he is forsworn:He calls us rebels, traitors; and will scourgeWith haughty arms this hateful name in us.Re-enter the EARL OF DOUGLASEARL OF DOUGLASArm, gentlemen; to arms! for I have thrownA brave defiance in King Henry's teeth,And Westmoreland, that was engaged, did bear it;Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.EARL OF WORCESTERThe Prince of Wales stepp'd forth before the king,And, nephew, challenged you to single fight.HOTSPURO, would the quarrel lay upon our heads,And that no man might draw short breath todayBut I and Harry Monmouth! Tell me, tell me,How show'd his tasking? seem'd it in contempt?VERNONNo, by my soul; I never in my lifeDid hear a challenge urged more modestly,Unless a brother should a brother dareTo gentle exercise and proof of arms.He gave you all the duties of a man;Trimm'd up your praises with a princely tongue,Spoke to your deservings like a chronicle,Making you ever better than his praiseBy still dispraising praise valued in you;And, which became him like a prince indeed,He made a blushing cital of himself;And chid his truant youth with such a graceAs if he master'd there a double spirit.Of teaching and of learning instantly.There did he pause: but let me tell the world,If he outlive the envy of this day,England did never owe so sweet a hope,So much misconstrued in his wantonness.HOTSPURCousin, I think thou art enamouredOn his follies: never did I hearOf any prince so wild a libertine.But be he as he will, yet once ere nightI will embrace him with a soldier's arm,That he shall shrink under my courtesy.Arm, arm with speed: and, fellows, soldiers, friends,Better consider what you have to doThan I, that have not well the gift of tongue,Can lift your blood up with persuasion.Enter a MessengerMessengerMy lord, here are letters for you.HOTSPURI cannot read them now.O gentlemen, the time of life is short!To spend that shortness basely were too long,If life did ride upon a dial's point,Still ending at the arrival of an hour.An if we live, we live to tread on kings;If die, brave death, when princes die with us!Now, for our consciences, the arms are fair,When the intent of bearing them is just.Enter another MessengerMessengerMy lord, prepare; the king comes on apace.HOTSPURI thank him, that he cuts me from my tale,For I profess not talking; only this--Let each man do his best: and here draw IA sword, whose temper I intend to stainWith the best blood that I can meet withalIn the adventure of this perilous day.Now, Esperance! Percy! and set on.Sound all the lofty instruments of war,And by that music let us all embrace;For, heaven to earth, some of us never shallA second time do such a courtesy.The trumpets sound. They embrace, and exeuntSCENE III. Plain between the camps.KING HENRY enters with his power. Alarum to the battle. Then enter DOUGLAS and SIR WALTER BLUNTSIR WALTER BLUNTWhat is thy name, that in the battle thusThou crossest me? what honour dost thou seekUpon my head?EARL OF DOUGLASKnow then, my name is Douglas;And I do haunt thee in the battle thusBecause some tell me that thou art a king.SIR WALTER BLUNTThey tell thee true.EARL OF DOUGLASThe Lord of Stafford dear to-day hath boughtThy likeness, for instead of thee, King Harry,This sword hath ended him: so shall it thee,Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.SIR WALTER BLUNTI was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot;And thou shalt find a king that will revengeLord Stafford's death.They fight. DOUGLAS kills SIR WALTER BLUNT. Enter HOTSPURHOTSPURO Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus,never had triumph'd upon a Scot.EARL OF DOUGLASAll's done, all's won; here breathless lies the king.HOTSPURWhere?EARL OF DOUGLASHere.HOTSPURThis, Douglas? no: I know this face full well:A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt;Semblably furnish'd like the king himself.EARL OF DOUGLASA fool go with thy soul, whither it goes!A borrow'd title hast thou bought too dear:Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king?HOTSPURThe king hath many marching in his coats.EARL OF DOUGLASNow, by my sword, I will kill all his coats;I'll murder all his wardrobe, piece by piece,Until I meet the king.HOTSPURUp, and away!Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.ExeuntAlarum. Enter FALSTAFF, solusFALSTAFFThough I could 'scape shot-free at London, I fearthe shot here; here's no scoring but upon the pate.Soft! who are you? Sir Walter Blunt: there's honourfor you! here's no vanity! I am as hot as moultenlead, and as heavy too: God keep lead out of me! Ineed no more weight than mine own bowels. I haveled my ragamuffins where they are peppered: there'snot three of my hundred and fifty left alive; andthey are for the town's end, to beg during life.But who comes here?Enter PRINCE HENRYPRINCE HENRYWhat, stand'st thou idle here? lend me thy sword:Many a nobleman lies stark and stiffUnder the hoofs of vaunting enemies,Whose deaths are yet unrevenged: I prithee,lend me thy sword.FALSTAFFO Hal, I prithee, give me leave to breathe awhile.Turk Gregory never did such deeds in arms as I havedone this day. I have paid Percy, I have made him sure.PRINCE HENRYHe is, indeed; and living to kill thee. I prithee,lend me thy sword.FALSTAFFNay, before God, Hal, if Percy be alive, thou get'stnot my sword; but take my pistol, if thou wilt.PRINCE HENRYGive it to me: what, is it in the case?FALSTAFFAy, Hal; 'tis hot, 'tis hot; there's that will sack a city.PRINCE HENRY draws it out, and finds it to be a bottle of sackPRINCE HENRYWhat, is it a time to jest and dally now?He throws the bottle at him. ExitFALSTAFFWell, if Percy be alive, I'll pierce him. If he docome in my way, so: if he do not, if I come in hiswillingly, let him make a carbonado of me. I likenot such grinning honour as Sir Walter hath: give melife: which if I can save, so; if not, honour comesunlooked for, and there's an end.Exit FALSTAFFSCENE IV. Another part of the field.Alarum. Excursions. Enter PRINCE HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, and EARL OF WESTMORELANDKING HENRY IVI prithee,Harry, withdraw thyself; thou bleed'st too much.Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.LANCASTERNot I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.PRINCE HENRYI beseech your majesty, make up,Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.KING HENRY IVI will do so.My Lord of Westmoreland, lead him to his tent.WESTMORELANDCome, my lord, I'll lead you to your tent.PRINCE HENRYLead me, my lord? I do not need your help:And God forbid a shallow scratch should driveThe Prince of Wales from such a field as this,Where stain'd nobility lies trodden on,and rebels' arms triumph in massacres!LANCASTERWe breathe too long: come, cousin Westmoreland,Our duty this way lies; for God's sake come.Exeunt LANCASTER and WESTMORELANDPRINCE HENRYBy God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster;I did not think thee lord of such a spirit:Before, I loved thee as a brother, John;But now, I do respect thee as my soul.KING HENRY IVI saw him hold Lord Percy at the pointWith lustier maintenance than I did look forOf such an ungrown warrior.PRINCE HENRYO, this boyLends mettle to us all!ExitEnter DOUGLASEARL OF DOUGLASAnother king! they grow like Hydra's heads:I am the Douglas, fatal to all thoseThat wear those colours on them: what art thou,That counterfeit'st the person of a king?KING HENRY IVThe king himself; who, Douglas, grieves at heartSo many of his shadows thou hast metAnd not the very king. I have two boysSeek Percy and thyself about the field:But, seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily,I will assay thee: so, defend thyself.EARL OF DOUGLASI fear thou art another counterfeit;And yet, in faith, thou bear'st thee like a king:But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be,And thus I win thee.They fight. KING HENRY being in danger, PRINCE HENRY entersPRINCE HENRYHold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art likeNever to hold it up again! the spiritsOf valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt, are in my arms:It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee;Who never promiseth but he means to pay.They fight: DOUGLAS fliesCheerly, my lord	how fares your grace?Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent,And so hath Clifton: I'll to Clifton straight.KING HENRY IVStay, and breathe awhile:Thou hast redeem'd thy lost opinion,And show'd thou makest some tender of my life,In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.PRINCE HENRYO God! they did me too much injuryThat ever said I hearken'd for your death.If it were so, I might have let aloneThe insulting hand of Douglas over you,Which would have been as speedy in your endAs all the poisonous potions in the worldAnd saved the treacherous labour of your son.KING HENRY IVMake up to Clifton: I'll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey.ExitEnter HOTSPURHOTSPURIf I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.PRINCE HENRYThou speak'st as if I would deny my name.HOTSPURMy name is Harry Percy.PRINCE HENRYWhy, then I seeA very valiant rebel of the name.I am the Prince of Wales; and think not, Percy,To share with me in glory any more:Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere;Nor can one England brook a double reign,Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.HOTSPURNor shall it, Harry; for the hour is comeTo end the one of us; and would to GodThy name in arms were now as great as mine!PRINCE HENRYI'll make it greater ere I part from thee;And all the budding honours on thy crestI'll crop, to make a garland for my head.HOTSPURI can no longer brook thy vanities.They fightEnter FALSTAFFFALSTAFFWell said, Hal! to it Hal! Nay, you shall find noboy's play here, I can tell you.Re-enter DOUGLAS; he fights with FALSTAFF,  who falls down as if he were dead, and exit DOUGLAS. HOTSPUR is wounded, and fallsHOTSPURO, Harry, thou hast robb'd me of my youth!I better brook the loss of brittle lifeThan those proud titles thou hast won of me;They wound my thoughts worse than sword my flesh:But thought's the slave of life, and life time's fool;And time, that takes survey of all the world,Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy,But that the earthy and cold hand of deathLies on my tongue: no, Percy, thou art dustAnd food for--DiesPRINCE HENRYFor worms, brave Percy: fare thee well, great heart!Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk!When that this body did contain a spirit,A kingdom for it was too small a bound;But now two paces of the vilest earthIs room enough: this earth that bears thee deadBears not alive so stout a gentleman.If thou wert sensible of courtesy,I should not make so dear a show of zeal:But let my favours hide thy mangled face;And, even in thy behalf, I'll thank myselfFor doing these fair rites of tenderness.Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven!Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,But not remember'd in thy epitaph!He spieth FALSTAFF on the groundWhat, old acquaintance! could not all this fleshKeep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell!I could have better spared a better man:O, I should have a heavy miss of thee,If I were much in love with vanity!Death hath not struck so fat a deer to-day,Though many dearer, in this bloody fray.Embowell'd will I see thee by and by:Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.Exit PRINCE HENRYFALSTAFF[Rising up]  Embowelled! if thou embowel me to-day,I'll give you leave to powder me and eat me tooto-morrow. 'Sblood,'twas time to counterfeit, orthat hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too.Counterfeit? I lie, I am no counterfeit: to die,is to be a counterfeit; for he is but thecounterfeit of a man who hath not the life of a man:but to counterfeit dying, when a man therebyliveth, is to be no counterfeit, but the true andperfect image of life indeed. The better part ofvalour is discretion; in the which better part Ihave saved my life.'Zounds, I am afraid of thisgunpowder Percy, though he be dead: how, if heshould counterfeit too and rise? by my faith, I amafraid he would prove the better counterfeit.Therefore I'll make him sure; yea, and I'll swear Ikilled him. Why may not he rise as well as I?Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me.Therefore, sirrah,Stabbing himwith a new wound in your thigh, come you along with me.Takes up HOTSPUR on his backRe-enter PRINCE HENRY and LORD JOHN OF LANCASTERPRINCE HENRYCome, brother John; full bravely hast thou flesh'dThy maiden sword.LANCASTERBut, soft! whom have we here?Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?PRINCE HENRYI did; I saw him dead,Breathless and bleeding on the ground. Artthou alive?Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight?I prithee, speak; we will not trust our eyesWithout our ears: thou art not what thou seem'st.FALSTAFFNo, that's certain; I am not a double man: but if Ibe not Jack Falstaff, then am I a Jack. There is Percy:Throwing the body downif your father will do me any honour, so; if not, lethim kill the next Percy himself. I look to be eitherearl or duke, I can assure you.PRINCE HENRYWhy, Percy I killed myself and saw thee dead.FALSTAFFDidst thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is given tolying! I grant you I was down and out of breath;and so was he: but we rose both at an instant andfought a long hour by Shrewsbury clock. If I may bebelieved, so; if not, let them that should rewardvalour bear the sin upon their own heads. I'll takeit upon my death, I gave him this wound in thethigh: if the man were alive and would deny it,'zounds, I would make him eat a piece of my sword.LANCASTERThis is the strangest tale that ever I heard.PRINCE HENRYThis is the strangest fellow, brother John.Come, bring your luggage nobly on your back:For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have.A retreat is soundedThe trumpet sounds retreat; the day is ours.Come, brother, let us to the highest of the field,To see what friends are living, who are dead.Exeunt PRINCE HENRY and LANCASTERFALSTAFFI'll follow, as they say, for reward. He thatrewards me, God reward him! If I do grow great,I'll grow less; for I'll purge, and leave sack, andlive cleanly as a nobleman should do.ExitSCENE V. Another part of the field.The trumpets sound. Enter KING HENRY IV, PRINCE  HENRY, LORD JOHN LANCASTER, EARL OF WESTMORELAND, with WORCESTER and VERNON prisonersKING HENRY IVThus ever did rebellion find rebuke.Ill-spirited Worcester! did not we send grace,Pardon and terms of love to all of you?And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary?Misuse the tenor of thy kinsman's trust?Three knights upon our party slain to-day,A noble earl and many a creature elseHad been alive this hour,If like a Christian thou hadst truly borneBetwixt our armies true intelligence.EARL OF WORCESTERWhat I have done my safety urged me to;And I embrace this fortune patiently,Since not to be avoided it falls on me.KING HENRY IVBear Worcester to the death and Vernon too:Other offenders we will pause upon.Exeunt WORCESTER and VERNON, guardedHow goes the field?PRINCE HENRYThe noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he sawThe fortune of the day quite turn'd from him,The noble Percy slain, and all his menUpon the foot of fear, fled with the rest;And falling from a hill, he was so bruisedThat the pursuers took him. At my tentThe Douglas is; and I beseech your graceI may dispose of him.KING HENRY IVWith all my heart.PRINCE HENRYThen, brother John of Lancaster, to youThis honourable bounty shall belong:Go to the Douglas, and deliver himUp to his pleasure, ransomless and free:His valour shown upon our crests to-dayHath taught us how to cherish such high deedsEven in the bosom of our adversaries.LANCASTERI thank your grace for this high courtesy,Which I shall give away immediately.KING HENRY IVThen this remains, that we divide our power.You, son John, and my cousin WestmorelandTowards York shall bend you with your dearest speed,To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,Who, as we hear, are busily in arms:Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales,To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,Meeting the cheque of such another day:And since this business so fair is done,Let us not leave till all our own be won.Exeunt